
purcbaseo for tbe Xtbrarp of 
Gbe \Hntver0it\> of Toronto 
out of tbe proceeos of tbe funo 

bequeatbe^ bp 
IT. 36. B>bWip0 Stewart, .H., xx.. 

OB. A.D. 1892. 






WILLIAM BLAKE. 












FROM A PORTRAIT OF BLAKE BY HIS WIFE. 

facsimile from the original by the kind permission of 
Mr. Home of the Hobby-Horse-Guild. 



THE WORKS 



WILLIAM BLAKE 

Jj0*tic, Sjjmbciiir, antr Critical 



EDITED WITH LITHOGRAPHS OF THE ILLUSTRATED 

"PROPHETIC BOOKS," AND A MEMOIR 

AND INTERPRETATION 



EDWIN JOHN ELLIS 

Author of " Fate in Arcadia," &c. 
AND 

WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS 

Author of " The Wanderings of Oisin," " T/te Countess Kathleen," &c. 



" Bring me to .the test 

And I the matter will re-word, which madness 
Would gambol from " 

Hamlet 



IN THREE VOLS. 
VOL. Ill 



LONDON 
BERNARD QUARITCH, 15 PICCADILLY 

1893 

[All Rights Reserved I 




R 






CONTENTS OF VOLUME III. 



FRONTISPIECE : FROM A PORTRAIT OF BLAKE BY HIS WIPE, 
FACSIMILE PROM THE ORIGINAL MADE BY KIND PERMISSION 
OF MR. 'HORNE OF THE HOBBY HORSE GUILD. 

POETICAL SKETCHES : PAGE 

King Edward the Third 3 

Prologue intended for a Dramatic Piece of King Edward 

the Fourth ... 20 

Prologue to King John . ...... 20 

To Spring thou with dewy locks, who lookest down . 21 
To Summer ......... 21 

To Autumn : 22 

To Winter ......... 22 

To the Evening Star . . . . . . .23 

To Morning . . . . . . . . .23 

Fair Eleanor 23 

Song How sweet I roamed from field to field . . 25 
Song My silks and fine array ..... 26 

Song Love and harmony combine ... . . .26 

Song I love the jocund dance ; . . 27 

Song Memory, hither come ...... 27 

Mad song ......... 28 

Song Fresh from the dewy hill, the merry year . . 28 
Song When early morn walks forth in sober grey . 29 

To the Muses 29 

Gvvin, King of Norway ....... 30 

An Imitation of Spenser . . . . . . .33 

Blind-man's Buff ... ^ .... 34 

A War Song : To Englishmen . . . . .35 



vi COX I KM >. 

- (IF 1\\'" I NCK : 

Introduction . .37 

The Shepherd . . 37 

The Echoing Green . . 38 

The Lamb .... .38 

The Little Black Boy . . .39 

The Blossom . . . 40 

The Chimney-sweeper When my mother died I was 
very young . . . . . . . . 40 

The Little Boy Lost Father, father, where are you going 40 

The Little Boy Found 41 

Laughing Song .41 

A Cradle Song Sweet dreams, form a shade ... 41 
The Divine Image To Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love . 42 
Holy Thursday 'Twas on a Holy Thursday, their inno- 
cent faces clean . . . . . . . . .43 

Night 43 

Spring Sound the Flute . . . . .44 

Nurse's Song When the voices of children are heard on 
the green ......... 45 

Infant Joy . . . . . ... . .45 

A Dream . . . . . . . . .45 

On Another's Sorrow . . . . . . .- -46 

i 
SONGS OP EXPERIENCE : 

Introduction ......... 48 

Earth's Answer ........ 48 

The Clod and the Pebble 49 

Holy Thursday Is this a holy thing to see ... 49 
The Little Girl Lost In futurity ... .50 

The Little Girl Found ..'... .51 

The Chimney-Sweeper A little black thing among tlie 

snow .......... 52 

Nurse's Song When the voices of children are heard 

on the green ........ 53 

The Sick Rose 53 

The Fly 53 

The Angel ... .54 

The Tiger .... . . .54 

My Pretty Rose Tree 55 

Ah, Sunflower V . . . . . . . .55 

The Lily . 55 



CONTEXTS. vii 

SOXGS OF EXPERIENCE, continued : PAGE 

The Garden of Love ....... 55 

The Little Vagabond 56 

London ......... 56 

The Human Abstract ....... 57 

Infant Sorrow . . . . . . . .57 

Christian Forbearance ....... 57 

A Little Boy Lost Nought loves another as itself . 58 

A Little Girl Lost Children of the future age . . 58 

A Divine Image Cruelty has a human heart . . 59 

A Cradle Song Sleep, sleep, beauty bright . . 59 

The Schoolboy 60 

To Tirzah 61 

The Voice of the Ancient Bavd .... 61 

THE GATES OF PARADISE : 

Introduction . . . . . . . . .62 

The Keys of the Gates 62 

Epilogue : To the Accuser, who is the God of this World 63 

To MY DEAR FRIEND, MRS. ANNA FLAXMAN .".,.,-, . .64 

To MR. BUTTS . . .64 

To MRS. BUTTS ......... o'5 

VERSES With happiness stretched across the hills . . 66 

THE BIRDS 68 

THE Two SONGS . . 68 

THE DEFILED SANCTUARY ....... 69 

COPID .69 

LOVE'S SECRET 70 

THE WILD FLOWER'S SONG - . .70 

SCOFFERS . . . . . . . . .70 

DAYBREAK . . . . . . . . .71 

THAMES AND OHIO 71 

YOUNG LOVE . . .71 

THE GOLDEN NET 72 

RICHES 72 

OPPORTUNITY ........ w . 72 

SEED-SOWING 73 

BARREN BLOSSOM ......... 73 

NIGHT AND DAY 73 

IN A MYRTLE SHADE 74 

IDOLATRY 74 

FOR A PICTURE OF THE LAST JUDGMENT : DEDICATION . 74 



viii CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

THB WILL AND THK WAT . 7"> 

SMII.K AND FROWN . .75 

T ii K LAND OF DREAMS . . 76 

AUGURIES OP INNOCENCE . .76 

WILLIAM BOND . . 79 

SONG BY A SHEPHERD . ... 80 

SONO BT AN OLD SHEPHERD . . . ... 80 

LONG JOHN BROWN AND LITTLE MARY BELL . 82 

MARY .... .81 

THE CRYSTAL CABINET . .82 

COUPLETS AND FRAGMENTS : 

I walked abroad on a snowy day ..... 84 

Abstinence sows sand all over ..... 84 

The look of love alarms ...... 84 

To Chloe's breast young Cupid slyly stole ... 84 

J Grown old in love from seven till seven times seven . 84 

The sword sang on the barren heath .... 84 

Great things are done when men and mountains meet . 84 
The errors of a wise man make your rule ... 84 
Some people admire the work of a fool . . . . 85 

He's a blockhead who wants a proof of wliat he can't 
perceive ........ .85 

If e'er I grow to man's estate ...... 85 

Her whole life is an epigram ...... 85 

Anger and wrath my bosom rends ..... 85 

I mock thee not ........ 85 

Here lies John Trot 85 

No real style of colouring now appears .... 85 

You don't believe . . . . . . . .86 

You must agree that Rubens was a fool .... 86 

When I see a Rembrandt or Correggio .... 86 

I asked my dear friend, Orator Prig . . . .87 

O dear mother Outline 87 

That God is colouring ....... 87 

To Venetian Artists 87 

NOTES TO THE POETICAL SKETCHES, SONGS, &c. ... 88 
THERE is NO NATURAL RELIGION. 



CONTENTS. 



Facsimiles and Reproductions. 



There is no Natural Re- 
ligion (facsimile witlwxt 
title) ..'-.-. 8 pages. 

The Laocoon group as 
God, Satan and Adam 
struggling in the toils of 
Nature .... 1 page. 



On Homer's Poetry . . 1 page. 

The Ghost of Abel . . 2 pages. 
The Marriage of Heaven 

and Hell . . . 27 

The Book of Los . 5 

The Book of Urizen . . 26 

Ahania . . 6 , 



TlBIKL. 



Thel 

Visions of the Daughters 

of Albion 

The Song of Los 7 

America a Prophecy . 12 ,, 

Europe a Prophecy . 15 ,, 

Jerusalem . . . 100 

Milton . . . . 45 

Vala . . . . 18 ,, 

The " Ghost of a Flea " . 1 page. 
Sketches from the MS. 

Book .... 3 pages. 



1 ^productions, continued. 

Plates The Soul hovering 
over the body . 
10 



The Soul exploring 
the recesses of 
the Grave . 

Reunion of the 
Soul and Body . 

Death of the Strong- 
Wicked Man 

Death of the Good 
Old Man . 

The Last Judgment 



1 page. 



VALA. 



VOL. III. 



POETICAL SKETCHES, ETC. 



VOL. III. 



POETICAL SKETCHES. 



KING EDWARD THE THIRD. 

PEESONS. 

KING EDWARD. SIB THOMAS DAGWORTH. 

THE BLACK PRINCE. SIR WALTER MANNY. 

QUEEN PHILIPPA. LORD AUDLET. 

DUKE OF CLARENCE. LORD PEROT. 

SIB JOHN CHANDOS. BISHOP. 

WILLIAM, Dagworth's man. 

PETEB BLUNT, a common soldier. 

SCENE I. The Coast of France. 

KINO EDWABD and Nobles before it. The Army. 

KING. 

thou to whose fury the nations are 
But as the dust 1 maintain thy servant's right. 
Without thine aid, the twisted mail, and spear, 
And forged helm, and shield of beaten brass, 
Are idle trophies of the vanquisher. 
When on the field in flame, confusion rages, 
When cries of blood tear horror out of heaven, 
And yelling Death runs up and down the ranks, 
Let Liberty, the chartered right of Englishmen, 
Won by our fathers in many a glorious field, 
Enerve my soldiers ; then let Liberty 
Blaze in each countenance, and fire the battle. 
The enemy fight in chains, unseen, but heavy ; 
Their minds are fettered ; then how can they be free ? 
While, like the mounting flame, 
We spring to battle o'er the floods of death 1 
And these fair youths, the flower of England, 
Venturing their lives in my most righteous cause, 
Oh sheathe their hearts with triple steel, that they 
May emulate thei* fathers' virtues ! Thou 
VOL. Ill, 1 * 



POETICAL SKETCHES : 

My son, bo strong ; thou fightcst for a crown 

That death can never ravish from thy brow, 

A crown of gloryFrom thy very dust 

Shall beam a radiance, to fire the breasts 

Of youth unborn ! Our names are written equal 

In Fame's wide-trophied hall ; 'tis ours to gild 

The letters, and to make them shine with gold 

That never tarnishes : whether Third Edward, 

The Prince of Wales, Montacute, Mortimer, 

Or ev'n the least by birth, shall gain the brightest fame, 

Is in His hand to whom all men are equal. 

The world of men are like the numerous stars 

That beam and twinkle in the depth of night, 

Each clad in glory according to his sphere ; 

But we, that wander from our native seats 

And beam forth lustre on a darkling world, 

Grow large as we advance : and some perhaps 

The most obscure at home, that scarce were seen 

To twinkle in their sphere, may so advance 

That the astonished world, with upturned eyes, 

Regardless of the moon, and those once bright, 

Stand only for to gaze upon their splendour, 

[He here knights the Prince and other young Nobles. 
Now let us take a just revenge for those 
Brave Lords who fell beneath the bloody axe 
At Paris. Noble Harcourt, thanks, for 'twas 
By your advice we landed here in Brittany, 
A country not yet sown with destruction, 
And where the fiery whirlwind of swift war 
Has not as yet swept its desolating wing. 
Into three parties we divide by day, 
And separate march, but join again at night : 
Each knows his rank, and Heaven marshal all. 

[Exeunt. 

SCENE II. English Court. 

LIONEL, DDKE OF CLARENCE, QUEEN PHILIPPA, 
Lords, Bishop, <c. 

CLARENCE. 

My Lords, I have by the advice of her 

Whom I am doubly bound to obey, my parent 

And my sovereign, called you together. 

My task is great, my burden heavier than 

My unfledged years ; 

Yet with your kind assistance, Lords, I hope 

England shall dwell in peace : that, while my father 

Toils in his wars, and turns his eyes on this 

Hi native shore, and sees commerce fly round 

With his white wings, and sees his golden London 



KING EDWARD THE THIRD. 

And her silver Thames, thronged with shining spires 

And corded ships, her merchants buzzing round 

Like summer bees, and all the golden cities 

O'erflowing with their honey, in his land 

Gloxy may not be dimmed with clouds of care. 

Say, Lords, should not our thoughts be first to commerce ? 

You, my Lord Bishop, would have agriculture? 

BISHOP. 

Sweet Prince, I know the arts of peace are great, 
And no less glorious than those of war, 
Perhaps more, in the philosophic mind. 
When I sit at my home, a private man, 
My thoughts are on my gardens and my fields, 
How to employ the hand that lacketh bread. 
If Industry is in my diocese, 
Eeligion will flourish ; each man's heart 
Is cultivated and will bring forth fruit : 
This is my private duty and my pleasure. 
But, as I sit in council with my prince, 
My thoughts take-in the general good of the whole, 
And England is the land favoured by Commerce ; 
For Commerce, though the child of Agriculture, 
Fosters his parent, who else must sweat and toil, 
And gain but scanty fare. Then, my dear Lord, 
Be England's trade our care ; and we, as tradesmen 
Looking to the gain of this our native land. 



my good Lord, true wisdom drops like honey 
From off your tongue, as from a worshipped oak 1 
Forgive, my Lords, my talkative youth, that speaks 
Not merely from my narrow observation, 

But what I have concluded from your lessons. 
Now, by the Queen's advice, I ask your leave 
To dine to-morrow with the Mayor of London 
If by your leave, I have another boon 
To ask, the favour of your company. 

1 fear Lord Percy will not give me leave. 

PERCY. 

Dear Sir, a prince should always keep his state, 
And grant hie favours with a sparing hand, 
Or they are never rightly valued. 
These are my thoughts : yet it were best to go : 
But keep a proper dignity, for now 
You represent the sacred person of 
Your father ; 'tis with princes as with the sun ; 
If not sometimes o'erclouded, we grow weary 
Of his officious glory. 



POETICAL SKETCHES : 

CLABENCE. 

Thi-ii you will give me leave to shine sometimes, 
My Lord ? 

LOBD ((Hide). 

Thou hast a gallant spirit, which I fear 
Will bo imposed on by the closer sort. 

CLARENCE. 

Well, I'll endeavour to take 

Lord Percy's advice ; I have been used so much 

To dignity that I'm sick on't. 

QUEEN FHILIPFA. 

Fie, fie, Lord Clarence ! you proceed not to business, 

But speak of your own pleasures. 

I hope their lordships will excuse your giddiness. 

CLARENCE. 

My Lords, the French have fitted out many 
Small ships of war that, like to ravening wolves, 
Infest our English seas, devouring all 
Our burdened vessels, spoiling our naval Hocks. 
The merchants do complain, and beg our aid. 

PERCY. 

The merchants are rich enough ; 
Can they not help themselves ? 
BISHOP. 

They can, and may; but how to gain their will 
Requires our countenance and help. 

PERCY. 

When that they find they must, my Lord, they will : 
Let them but suffer awhile, and you shall see 
They will bestir themselves. 

BISHOP. 

Lord Percy cannot mean that we should suffer 
Disgrace like this. If so, we are not sovereigns 
Of the sea, our right, a right that Heaven gave 
To England, when at the birth of Nature 
She in the deep was seated ; Ocean ceased 
His mighty roar, and, fawning, played around 
Her snowy feet, and owned his awful Queen. 
Lord Percy, if the heart is sick, the head 
Must be aggrieved ; if but one member suffer, 
The heart doth fail. You say, my Lord, the merchants 
Can, if they will, defend themselves against 
These rovers : this must be a noble scheme, 
Worthy the brave Lord Percy, and as worthy 
His generous aid to put it into practice. 

PERCY. 

Lord Bishop, what was rash in me is wise 
In you ; I dare not own the plan. 'Tis not 



KING EDWARD THE THIRD. 

Mine. Yet will I, if you please, 

Quickly to the Lord Mayor, and vrork him onward 

To this most glorious voyage ; on which cast 

I'll set my whole estate, 

But we will bring these Gallic rovers under. 

QUEEN PHILIPPA. 

Thanks, brave Lord Percy ; you have the thanks 
Of England's Queen, and will, ere long, of England. 

[Exeunt. 

SCENE III. At Cressy. 
SIR THOMAS DAGWORTH and LOBD AUDLEY meeting. 

AUDLEY. 

Good-morrow, brave Sir Thomas ; the bright morn 
Smiles on our army, and the gallant sun 
Springs from the hills like a young hero leaping 
Into the battle, shaking his golden locks 
Exultingly : this is a promising day. 

DAGWOKTH. 

Why that, my good Lord Audley, I don't know. 
Give me your hand, and now I'll tell you what 
I think you do not know. Edward 's afraid 
Of Philip. 

AUDLEY. 

Ha, ha ! Sir Thomas 1 you but joke ; 
Did you e'er see him fear ? At Blanchetaque, 
When almost singly he drove six thousand 
French from the ford, did he fear then ? 

DAGWORTH. 

Yes, fear. 
That made him fight so. 

AUDLEY. 

By the same reason I might say 'tis fear 
That makes you fight. 

DAGWORTH. 

Mayhap you may. Look upon Edward's face, 
No one can say he fears ; but, when he turns 
His back, then I will say it to his face ; 
He is afraid : he makes us all afraid. 
I cannot bear the enemy at my back. 
Now here we are at Cressy ; where to-morrow ? 
To-morrow we shall know. I say, Lord Audley, 
That Edward runs away from Philip. 

AUDLEY. 
Perhaps you think the Prince too is afraid ? 

DAGWORTH. 

No ; God forbid ! I am sure he is not. 

He is a young lion. Oh I have seen him fight 



POETICAL SKETCHES: 

Ami give command, and lightning has flashed 

From his eyes across the field : I have seen him 

Shake hands with Death, and strike a bargain for 

The enemy ; he has danced in the field 

Of battle, like the youth at morris-play. 

I'm sure he's not afraid, nor Warwick, nor none, 

None of us but me, and I am very much afraid. 

AUDLBY. 

Are you afraid, too, Sir Thomas ? I believe that 
As much as I believe the King's afraid : 
But what are you afraid of ? 

IM.OWORTU. 

Of having my back laid open ; we must turn 
Our backs to the Ore, till we shall burn our skirts. 

AUDLEY. 

And this, Sir Thomas, you call fear? Your fear 
Is of a different kind, then, from the King's ; 
He fears to turn his face, and you to turn your back. 
I do not think, Sir Thomas, you know what fear is. 

Enter SIB JOIIN CIIANDOS. 

CHANDOS. 

Good-morrow, Generals; I give you joy : 
Welcome to the fields of Cressy. Here we slop, 
And wait for Philip. 

DAOWOBTH. 

I hope so. 

AUDLEY. 

There, Sir Thomas ; do you call that fear ? 

DAOWOBTH. 

I don't know ; perhaps he takes it by fits. 
Why, noble Chandos, look you here 
One rotten sheep spoils the whole flock ; 
And if the bell-wether is tainted, I wish 
The Prince may not catch the distemper too. 

CHANDOS. 

Distemper, Sir Thomas ! What distemper ? 
I have not heard. 

DAOWOBTH. 

Why, Chandos, you are a wise man, 
I know you understand me ; a distemper 
The King caught here in France of running away. 

AUDLZY. 
Sir Thomas, you say you have caught it too. 

DAOWOBTH. 

And so will the whole army ; 'tis very catching, 
For, when the coward runs, the brave man totters. 



KING EDWARD THE THIRD. 

Perhaps the air of the country is the cause. 
I feel it coming upon me, so I strive against it ; 
You yet are whole ; but, after a few more 
Eetreats, we all shall know how to retreat 
Better than fight. To be plain, I think retreating 
Too often takes away a soldier's courage. 

CHANDOS. 

Here comes the King himself : tell him your thoughts 
Plainly, Sir Thomas. 

DAGWOBTH. 

I've told him this before, but his disorder 
Has made him deaf. 

Enter KING EDWABD and BLACK PRINCE. 

KING. 

Good-morrow, Generals ; when English courage 
Shall fail, down goes at once our right to France. 
But we are conquerors everywhere; nothing 
Can stand before our soldiers ; each is worthy 
Of a triumph. Such an army, heroes all, 
Ne'er shouted to the heavens,. nor shook the field. 
Edward, my son, thou art, among us here 
Most happy, having such command : the man 
Were more than base who were not fired to deeds 
Above heroic, having such examples. 

PKINCE. 

Sire, with respect and deference I look 
Upon such noble souls, and wish myself 
Worthy the high command that Heaven and you 
Have given me. When I've seen the field a-glow, 
And in each countenance the soul of war 
Curbed by the manliest reason, I've been winged 
With certain victory ; and 'tis my boast, 
And shall be still my glory, I was inspired 
By these brave troops. 

DAGWOBTH. 

Your Grace had better make them 
All Generals. 

KING. 

Sir Thomas Dagworth, you must have your joke 
And shall, while you can fight as you did at 
The Ford. 

DAGWOBTH. 

I have a small petition to your Majesty. 

KING. 

What can Sir Thomas Dagworth ask 
That Edward can refuse ? 



10 POETICAL SKETCHES : 

DAQWOKTH. 

I hope your Majesty cannot refuse so groat 

A trifle ; I've gilt your cause with my best blood, 

And would again, were I not forbid 

By him whom I am bound to obey : my hands 

Are tied up, all my courage shrunk and withered, 

My sinews slackened, and my voice scarce heard ; 

Therefore I beg I may return to England. 

KINO. 

I know not what you could have asked, Sir Thomas, 
That I would not have sooner parted with 
Than such a soldier as you, and such a friend : 
Nay, I will know the most remote particulars 
Of this your strange petition ; that, if I can, 
I still may keep you here. 

DAGWORTH. 

Here on the fields of Cressy we are settled 
Till Philip springs the timorous covey again. 
The wolf is hunted down by causeless fear ; 
The lion flees, and fear usurps his heart, 
Startled, astonished at the clamorous cock ; 
The eagle, that doth gaze upon the sun, 
Fears the small tire that plays about the fen. 
If, at this moment of their idle fear, 
The dog doth seize the wolf, the forester the lion, 
The negro in the crevice of the rock 
Doth seize the soaring eagle ; undone by flight, 
They tame submit : such the effect flight has 
On noble souls. Now hear its opposite : 
The timorous stag starts from the thicket wild, 
The fearful crane springs from the splashy fun, 
The shining snake glides o'er the bending grass, 
The stag turns head, and bays the crying hounds ; 
The crane o'ertaken fighteth with the hawk ; 
The snake doth turn, and bite the padding foot. 
And if your Majesty's afraid of Philip, 
You are more like a lion than a crane : 
Therefore I beg I may return to England. 



Sir Thomas, now I understand your mirth, 
Which often plays with wisdom for its pastime, 
And brings good counsel from the breast of laughter. 
I hope you'll stay and see us fight this battle, 
And reap rich harvest in the fields of Cressy ; 
Then go to England, tell them how we fight, 
And set all hearts on fire to be with us. 
Philip is plumed, and thinks we flee from him, 



KING EDWARD THE THIRD. 11 

Else he would never dare to attack us. Now, 
Now the quarry's set ! and Death doth sport 
In the bright sunshine of this fatal day. 

DAGWOKTH. 

Now my heart dances, and I am as light 
As the young bridegroom going to be married. 
Now must I to my soldiers, get them ready, 
Furbish our armours bright, new-plume our helms ; 
And we will sing like the young housewives busied 
In the dairy. Now my feet are wing'd, but not 
For flight, an please your grace. 

KING. 

If all my soldiers are as pleased as you, 
'Twill be a gallant thing to fight or die ; 
Then I can never be afraid of Philip. 

DAGWOBTH. 

A raw-boned fellow t' other day passed by me ; 
I told him to put off his hungry looks 
He said, "I hunger for another battle." 
I saw a little Welshman, fiery-faced ; 
I told him he looked like a candle half 
Burned out ; he answered, he was "pig enough 
" To light another pattle." Last night, beneath 
The moon I walked abroad, when all had pitched 
Their tents, and all were still ; 
I heard a blooming youth singing a song 
He had composed, and at each pause he wiped 
His dropping eyes. The ditty was, " If he 
Eeturned victorious, he should wed a maiden 
Fairer than snow, and rich as midsummer." 
Another wept, and wished health to his father. 
I chid them both, but gave them noble hopes. 
These are the minds that glory in the battle, 
And leap and dance to hear the trumpet sound. 

KING. 

Sir Thomas Dagworth, be thou near our person 
Thy heart is richer than the vales of France : 
I will not part with such a man as thou. 
If Philip came armed in the ribs of death, 
And shook his mortal dart against my head, 
Thou'dst laugh his fury into nerveless shame ! 
Go now, for thou art suited to the work, 
Throughout the camp ; inflame the timorous, 
Blow up the sluggish into ardour, and 
Confirm the strong with strength, the weak inspire, 
And wing their brows with hope and expectation : 
Then to our tent return, and meet to council. 

[Exit DAGWOBTH. 



12 POETICAL SKETCHES : 

CHANDOB. 

That man's a hero in his closet, and more 
A hero to the servants of his house 
Than to the gaping world ; he carries windows 
In that enlarged breast of his, that all 
May sec what's done within. 

PRINCE. 

He is a genuine Englishman, my Chandos, 
And hath the spirit of Liberty within him. 
Forgive my prejudice, Sir John ; I think 
My Englishmen the bravest people oil 
The face of the earth. 

CHANDOS. 

Couiage, my Lord, proceeds from self-dependence. 
Teach every man to think he's a free agent. 
Give but a slave his liberty, he'll shake 
Off sloth, and build himself a hut, and hedge 
A spot of ground ; this he'll defend ; 'tis his 
By right of Nature. Thus being set in action, 
He will move on to plan conveniences, 
Till glory tires him to enlarge his castle ; 
While the poor slave drudges all day, in hope 
To rest at night. 

KINO. 

Liberty, how glorious art thou I 

1 see thee hovering o'er my army, with 

Thy wide-stretched plumes ; I see thee lead them on ; 

I see thee blow thy golden trumpet while 

Thy sons shout the strong shout of victory ! 

noble Chandos, think thyself a gardener, 

My son a vine, which I commit unto 

Thy care. Prune all extravagant shoots, and guide 

The ambitious tendrils in the path of wisdom ; 

Water him with thy clear advice, and Heaven 

Bain freshening dew upon his branches ! And, 

O Edward, my dear son ! think lowly of 

Thyself, as we may all each prefer other 

'Tis the best policy, and 'tis our duty. 

[Exit KING EDWARD. 
PRINCE. 

nd may our duty, Chandos, be our pleasure. 
Now we are alone, Sir John, I will unburden 
And breathe my hopes into the burning air, 
Where thousand Deaths are posting up and down, 
Commissioned to this fatal field of Cressy. 
Methinks I see them arm my gallant soldiers, 
And gird the sword upon each thigh, and fit 









KING EDWARD THB THIRD. 13 

Each shining helm, and string each stubborn bow, 

And dance to the neighing of our steeds. 

Methinks the shout begins, the battle burns : 

Methinks I see them perch on English crests, 

And roar the wild flame of fierce war upon 

The thronged enemy ! In truth, I am too full ; 

It is my sin to love the noise of war. 

Chandos, thou seest my weakness ; for strong Nature 

Will bend or break us : my blood, like a springtide 

Does rise so high to overflow all bounds 

Of moderation ; while Eeason, in her 

Frail bark, can see no shore or bound for vast 

Ambition. Come, take the helm, my Chandos, 

That my full-blown sails overset me not 

In the wild tempest. Condemn my venturous youth 

That plays with danger, as the innocent child, 

Unthinking, plays upon the viper's den : 

I am a coward in my reason, Chandos. 

CHANDOS. 

You are a man, my prince, and a brave man, 
If I can judge of actions ; but your heat 
Is the effect of youth, and want of use : 
Use makes the armed field and noisy war 
Pass over as a cloud does, unregarded, 
Or but expected as a thing of course. 
Age is contemplative ; each rolling year 
Brings forth her fruit to the mind's treasure-house : 
While vacant youth doth crave and seek about 
Within itself, and findeth discontent, 
Then, tired of thought, impatient takes the wing, 
Seizes the fruits of time, attacks experience, 
Roams round vast Nature's forest, where no bounds 
Are set, the swiftest may have room, the strongest 
Find prey; till, tired at length, sated and tired 
With the changing sameness, old variety, 
We sit us down, and view our former joys 
With distaste and dislike. 

PBINCE. 

Then, if we must tug for experience, 
Let us not fear to beat round Nature's wilds, 
And rouse the strongest prey : then if we fall, 
We fall with glory. I know well the wolf 
Is dangerous to fight, not good for food, 
Nor is the hide a comely vestment ; so 
We have our battle for our pains. I know 
That youth has need of age to point fit prey, 
And oft the stander-by shall steal the fruit 
Of the other's labour. This is philosophy ; 



14 POETICAL SKETCHES : 

These are the tricks of the world ; bnt the pure soul 
Shall mount on native wings, disdaining little sport, 
And cut a path into the heaven of glory, 
Leaving a track of light for men to wonder at. 
I'm glad my father does not hear me talk; 
You can find friendly excuses for me, Chandos. 
But do you not think, Sir John, that, if it please 
The Almighty to stretch out my span of life, 
I shall with pleasure view a glorious action 
Which my youth mastered ? 

CHANDOS. 

Age, my Lord, views motives, 
And views not acts ; when neither warbling voice 
Nor trilling pipe is heard, nor pleasure sits 
With trembling age, the voice of Conscience then, 
Sweeter than music in a summer's eve, 
Shall warble round the snowy head, and keep 
Sweet symphony to feathered angels, sitting 
As guardians round your chair ; then shall the pulse 
Beat slow, and taste and touch, sight, sound and smell, 
That sing and dance round Reason's fine-wrought throne, 
Shall flee away, and leave him all forlorn ; 
Yet not forlorn if Conscience is his friend. 

[Exeunt. 

SCENE IV. In SIB THOMAS DAGWORTH'S Tent. 
DAGWOBTH, and WILLIAM Ins man. 

DAGWORTH. 

Bring hither my armour, William. 
Ambition is the growth of every clime. 

WILLIAM. 
Does it grow in England, sir ? 

DAGWORTH. 

Ay, it grows most in lands most cultivated. 

WILLIAM. 

Then it grows most in France ; the vines here 
Are finer that any we have in England. 

DAGWORTH. 

Ay, but the oaks are not. 

WILLIAM. 

What is the tree you mentioned? I don't think 
I ever saw it. 

DAGWORTH. 

Ambition. 



KING EDWARD THE THIRD. 15 

WILLIAM. 
Is it a little creeping root that grows in ditches ? 

DAQWOBTH. 

Thou dost not understand me, William, 
It is a root that grows in every breast ; 
Ambition is the desire or passion that one man 
Has to get before another, in any pursuit after glory ; 
But I don't think you have any of it. 

WILLIAM. 
Yes, I have ; I have a great ambition to know everything, sir. 

DAGWOETH. 

But, when our first ideas are wrong, what follows must all be 
wrong, of course ; 'tis best to know a little, and to know that little 
aright. 

WILLIAM. 

Then, sir, I should be glad to know if it was not ambition that 
brought over our king to France to fight for his right. 

DAQWOBTH. 

Though the knowledge of that will not profit thee much, yet I will 
tell you that it ivas ambition. 

WILLIAM. 

Then, if ambition is a sin, we are all guilty in coming with him, 
and in fighting for him. 

DAGWOETH. 

Now, William, thou dost thrust the question home ; hut I must 
tell you that, guilt being an act of the mind, none are guilty but 
those whose minds are prompted by that same ambition. 

WILLIAM. 

Now, I always thought that a man might be guilty of doing wrong 
without knowing it was wrong. 

DAGWOBTH. 

Thou art a natural philosopher, and knowest truth by instinct ; 
while reason runs aground, as we have run our argument. Only 
remember, William, all have it in their power to know the motives of 
their own actions, and 'tis a sin to act without some reason. 

WILLIAM. 

And whoever acts without reason may do a great deal of harm, 
without knowing it. 

DAGWOBTH. 

Thou art an endless moralist. 

WILLIAM. 

Now there's a story come into my head, that I will tell your honour,, 
if you'll give me leave. 



16 POETICAL RKETCHKS: 

DAOWORTH. 

No, William, save it till another time ; this is no time for story- 
telling. But here comes one who is as entertaining as a good 
story. 

Enter PETER BLUNT. 

FETEB. 

Yonder's a musician going to play before the King; it's a new 
song about the French and English. And the Prince has made 
the minstrel a squire, and given him I don't know what, and 
can't tell whether he don't mention us all one by one ; and he 
is to write another about all us that are to die, that we may be 
remembered in Old England, for all our blood and bones are in 
France; and a great deal more that we shall all hear by and by. 
And I came to tell your honour, because you love to hear war- 
songs. 

DAG WORTH. 

And who is this minstrel, Peter, dost know ? 

PETER. 

Oh ay, I forgot to tell that ; he has got the same name as Sir 
John Chandos that the Prince is always with the wise man that 
knows us all as well as your honour, only ain't so good-natured. 

DAOWORTH. 

I thank you, Peter, for your information, but not for your com- 
pliment, which is not true. There's as much difference between 
him and me as between glittering sand and fruitful mould ; or 
shining glass and a wrought diamond, set in rich gold, and fitted 
to the finger of an Emperor; such is that worthy Chandos. 

PETER. 

I know your honour does not think anything of yourself, but 
everybody else does. 

DAOWORTH. 

Go, Peter, get you gone ; flattery is delicious, even from the lips 
of n babbler. [Exit PETER. 

WILLIAM. 
I never flatter your honour. 

DAGWORTH. 

I don't know that. 

WILLIAM. 

Why yon know, sir, when we were in England, at the tourna- 
ment at Windsor, and the Earl of Warwick was tumbled over, you 
asked me if he did not look well when he fell ; and I said no, he 
looked very foolish ; and you were very angry with me for not 
flattering you. 

DAOWORTH. 

You mean that J was Angry with you for pot flattering the Earl 
of Warwick. [Exeunt. 



KING KDWA.RD THE THIRD. 17 

SCENE V. Sir Thomas Dagworth's Tent. 
SIB THOMAS DAGWOBTH. To him enters SIB WALTEB MANNY. 

SIB WALTEB. 

Sir Thomas Dagworth, I've been weeping now 
Over the men that are to die to-day. 

DAQWOBTH. 

Why, brave Sir Walter, you or I may fall. 

BIB WALTEB. 

I know this breathing flesh must lie and rot, 
Covered with silence and forgetfulness. 
Death roams in cities' smoke, and in still night, 
When men sleep in their beds, walketh about. 
How many in walled cities lie and groan, 
Turning themselves about upon their beds, 
Talking with Death, answering his hard demands ! 
How many walk in darkness, terrors round 
The curtains of their beds, destruction still 
Ready at the door ! How many sleep in earth, 
Covered over with stones and deathy dust, 
Besting in quietness, whose spirits walk 
Upon the clouds of heaven, to die no more ! 
Yet death is terrible, though on angels' wings. 
How terrible then is the field of death, 
Where he doth rend the vault of heaven, and shake 
The gates of hell ! 

Dagworth, France is sick ! the very sky, 
Though sunshine light it, seems to me as pale 
As the pale fainting man on his death-bed, 
Whose face is shown by light of sickly taper. 
It makes me sad and sick at very heart ; 
Thousands must fall to-day. 

DAGWOBTH. 

Thousands of souls must leave this prison-house, 
To be exalted to those heavenly fields 
Where songs of triumph, palms of victory, 
Where peace and joy and love and calm content, 
Sit singing in the azure clouds, and strew 
Flowers of heaven's growth over the banquet-table. 
Bind ardent hope upon your feet like shoes, 
Put on the robe of preparation ! 
The table is prepared in shining heaven, 
The flowers of immortality are blown ; 
Let those that fight fight in good stedfastness, 
And those that fall shall rise in victory. 
VOL. III. 2 



18 POETICAL SKETCHES : 

BIB WALTEB. 

I've often seen the burning field of war, 
And often heard the dismal clang of arms ; 
Bat never, till this fatal day of Cressy, 
Has my soul fainted with these views of death. 
I seem to be in one great charnel-house, 
And seem to scent the rotten carcases ; 
I seem to hear the dismal yells of Death, 
While the black gore drops from his horrid jaws : 
Yet I not fear the monster in his pride- 
But oh ! the souls that are to die to-day ! 

DAG WORTH. 

Stop, brave Sir Walter ; let me drop a tear, 

Then let the clarion of war begin ; 

I'll fight and weep, 'tis in my country's cause ; 

I'll weep and shout for glorious liberty. 

Grim War shall laugh and shout, bedecked in tears, 

And blood shall flow like streams across the meadows, 

That murmur down their pebbly channels, and 

Spend their sweet lives to do their country service : 

Then England's green shall shoot, her fields shall smile, 

Her ships shall sing across the foaming sea, 

Her mariners shall use the flute and viol, 

And rattling guns, and black and dreary war, 

Shall be no more. 

SIB WALTER. 

Well, let the trumpet sound, and the dram beat ; 

Let war stain the blue heavens with bloody banners ; 

I'll draw my sword, nor ever sheathe it up 

Till England blow the trump of victory, 

Or I lie stretched upon the field of death. [Exeunt. 

SCENE VI. In the Camp. 

Several of the Warriors met at the King's Tent with a Minstrel, who 
sings the following Song : 

O sons of Trojan Brutus, clothed in war, 
Whose voices are the thunder of the field, 
Rolling dark clouds o'er France, muffling the son 
In sickly darkness like a dim eclipse, 
Threatening as the red brow of storms, as fire 
Burning up nations in your wrath and fury ! 

Tour ancestors came from the fires of Troy 
(Like lions roused by lightning from their dens, 
Whose eyes do glare against the stormy fires), 
Heated with war, filled with the blood of Greeks, 
With helmets hewn, and shields covered with gore, 
In navies black, broken with wind and tide : 



KING EDWARD THE THIRD. 19 

Landing in firm array upon the rocks 

Of Albion ; they kissed the rocky shore ; 

" Be thou our mother and our nurse," they said ; 

" Our children's mother, and thou shalt be our grave, 

The sepulchre of ancient Troy, from whence 

Cities shall rise, thrones, arms, and awful powers." 

Our fathers swarm from the ships. Giant voices 
Are heard from all the hills, the enormous sons 
Of Ocean run from rocks and caves ; wild men, 
Naked and roaring like lions, hurling rocks, 
And wielding knotty clubs, like oaks entangled 
Thick as a forest, ready for the axe. 

Our fathers move in firm array to battle ; 
The savage monsters rush like roaring fire ; 
Like as a forest roars with crackling flames, 
When the red lightning, borne by furious storms, 
Lights on some woody shore ; the parched heavens 
Eain fire into the molten raging sea. 

The smoking trees are strewn upon the shore, 
Spoiled of their verdure. Oh how oft have they 
Defied the storm that howled o'er their heads I 
Our fathers, sweating, lean on spears, and view 
The mighty dead : great bodies streaming blood, 
Dread visages frowning in silent death. 

Then Brutus spoke, inspired ; our fathers sit 

Attentive on the melancholy shore : 

Hear ye the voice of Brutus " The flowing waves 

Of time come rolling o'er my breast," he said ; 

" And my heart labours with futurity. 

Our sons shall rule the empire of the sea. 

" Their mighty wings shall stretch from east to west. 

Their nest is in the sea, but they shall roam 

Like eagles for the prey ; nor shall the young 

Crave to be heard ; for plenty shall bring forth, 

Cities shall sing, and vales in rich array 

Shall laugh, whose fruitful laps bend down with fulness. 



" Our sons shall rise up from their thrones in joy, 
Each buckling on his armour ; and the dawn 
Shall be prevented by their swords gleaming. 
Evening shall hear their song of victory : 
Their towers shall be built upon the rocks, 
Their daughters sing, surrounded with their spears. 
VOL. III. 2 * 



20 POETICAL SKETCHES : 

" Liberty shall on cliffs of Albion stand, 
Casting her blue eyes over the green sea ; 
Or towering upon the roaring waves, 
Stretching her mighty spear o'er distant lands ; 
While with her eagle wings she covereth 
Fair Albion's shore, and all her families." 



PROLOGUE. 

INTENDED FOB A DRAMATIC PIECE OF KINO EDWARD THE FOURTH. 

On for a voice like thunder, and a tongue 
To drown the throat of war ! When the senses 
Are shaken, and the soul is driven to madness, 
Who can stand ? When the souls of the oppressed 
Fight in the troubled air that rages, who can stand ? 
When the whirlwind of fury comes from the throne 
Of God, when the frowns of His countenance 
Drive the nations together, who can stand ? 
When Sin claps his broad wings over the battle, 
And sails rejoicing in the flood of death ; 
When souls are torn to everlasting fire, 
And fiends of hell rejoice upon the slain, 
Oh who can stand ? Oh who hath caused this ? 
Oh who can answer at the throne of God ? 
The Kings and Nobles of the land have done it ! 
Hear it not, Heaven, thy ministers have done it 1 



PROLOGUE TO KING JOHN. 

(Compare Vol. I., p. 177.) 

JUSTICE hath heaved a sword to plunge in Albion's breast ; 

For Albion's sins are crimson-dyed, 

And the red scourge follows her desolate sons. 

Then Patriot rose ; full oft did Patriot rise, 

When Tyranny hath stained fair Albion's breast 

With her own children's gore. 

Bound his majestic feet deep thunders roll ; 

Each heart does tremble, and each knee grows slack. 

The stars of heaven tremble ; the roaring voice of war, 

The trumpet, calls to battle. Brother in brother's blood 

Must bathe, rivers of death. land most hapless I 

beauteous island, how forsaken I 

Weep from thy silver fountains, weep from thy gentle rivers ! 

The angel of the island weeps ; 

Thy widowed virgins weep beneath thy shades. 

Thy aged fathers gird themselves for war ; 

The sucking infant lives, to die in battle ; 

The weeping mother feeds him for the Blanghter. 



TO SUMMER. 21 

The husbandman doth leave his bending harvest. 

Blood cries afar I The land doth sow itself ! 

The glittering youth of courts must gleam in arms ; 

The aged senators their ancient swords assume ; 

The trembling sinews of old age must work 

The work of death against their progeny. 

For Tyranny hath stretched his purple arm, 

And " Blood ! " he cries : " The chariots and the horses, 

The noise of shout, and dreadful thunder of the battle heard afar ! ' 

Beware, proud 1 thou shalt be humbled ; 

Thy cruel brow, thine iron heart is smitten, 

Though lingering Fate is slow. Oh yet may Albion 

Smile again, and stretch her peaceful arms. 

And raise her golden head exultingly 1 

Her citizens shall throng about her gates, 

Her mariners shall sing upon the sea, 

And myriads shall to her temples crowd ! 

Her sons shall joy as in the morning 

Her daughters sing as to the rising year ! 



TO SPRING. 

THOD with dewy locks, who lookest down 
Through the clear windows of the morning, turn 
Thine angel eyes upon our western isle, 
Which in full choir hails thy approach, Spring ! 

The hills tell to each other, and the listening 
Valleys hear ; all our longing eyes are turned 
Up to thy bright pavilions : issue forth, 
And let thy holy feet visit our clime ! 

Come o'er the eastern hills, and let our winds 
Kiss thy perfumed garments ; let us taste 
Thy morn and evening breath ; scatter thy pearls 
Upon our lovesick land that mourns for thee. 

Oh deck her forth with thy fair fingers ; pour 
Thy soft kisses on her bosom ; and put 
Thy golden crown upon her languished head, 
Whose modest tresses were bound up for thee ! , 



TO SUMMER. 

THOU who passest through our valleys in 

Thy strength, curb thy fierce steeds, allay the heat 

That flames from their large nostrils ! Thou, Summer, 

Oft pitchedst here thy golden tent, and oft 

Beneath our oaks hast slept, while we beheld 

With joy thy ruddy limbs and flourishing hair. 



1'OETICAL SKETCHES. 

Beneath our thickest shades we oft have heard 

Thy voice, when Noon upon his fervid car 

Bode o'er the deep of heaven. Beside our springs 

Sit down, and in our mossy valleys, on 

Some bank beside a river clear, throw thy 

Silk draperies off, and rush into the stream t 

Our valleys love the Summer in his pride. 

4 

Our bards are famed who strike the silver wire : 
Our youth are bolder than the southern swains, 
Our maidens fairer in the sprightly dance. 
We lack not. songs, nor instruments of joy, 
Nor echoes sweet, nor waters clear as heaven, 
Nor laurel wreaths against the sultry heat. 



TO AUTUMN. 

AUTUMN, laden with fruit, and stained 
With the blood of the grape, pass not, but sit 
Beneath my shady roof ; there thou mayst rest, 
And tune thy jolly voice to my fresh pipe, 
And all the daughters of the year shall dance 1 
Sing now the lusty song of fruits and flowers. 

" The narrow bud opens her beauties to 
The sun, and love runs in her thrilling veins; 
Blossoms hang round the brows of Morning, and 
Flourish down the bright cheek of modest Eve, 
Till clustering Summer breaks forth into singing, 
And feathered clouds strew flowers round her head. 

" The Spirits of the Air live on the smells 

Of fruit ; and Joy, with pinions light, roves round 

The gardens, or sits singing in the trees." 

Thus sang the jolly Autumn as he sat ; 

Then rose, girded himself, and o'er the bleak 

Hills fled from our sight ; but left his golden load. 



TO WINTER. 

WINTER ! bar thine adamantine doors : 
The north is thine ; there hast thou built thy dark 
Deep-founded habitation. Shake not thy roofs, 
Nor bend thy pillars with thine iron car. 

He hears me not, but o'er the yawning deep 
Bides heavy ; his storms are unchained, sheathed 
In ribbed steel ; I dare not lift mine eyes 
For he hath reared his sceptre o'er the world. 



FAIR ELEANOR. 23 

Lo 1 now the direful monster, whose skin clings 
To his strong bones, strides o'er the groaning rocks : 
He withers all in silence, and in his hand 
Unclothes the earth, and freezes up frail life. 

He takes his seat upon the cliffs, the mariner 

Cries in vain. Poor little wretch, that deal'st 

With storms ! till heaven smiles, and drives the monster 

Yelling beneath Mount Heola to his caves. 



TO THE EVENING STAB. 

THOU fair-haired Angel of the Evening, 
Now, whilst the sun rests on the mountains, light 
Thy brilliant torch of love thy radiant crown 
Put on, and smile upon our evening bed ! 
Smile on our loves ; and, while thou drawest the 
Blue curtains of the sky, scatter thy dew 
On every flower that closes its sweet eyes t 
In timely sleep. Let thy west wind sleep on 
The lake ; speak silence with thy glimmering eyes, 
And wash the dusk with silver, Soon, full soon, 
Dost thou withdraw ; then the wolf rages wide, 
And then the lion glares through the dun forest. 
The fleeces of our flocks are covered with 
Thy sacred dew : protect with influence 1 



TO MORNING. 

HOLY virgin, clad in purest white, 

Unlock heaven's golden gates, and issue forth ; 

Awake the dawn that sleeps in heaven ; let light 

Eise from the chambers of the east, and bring 

The honeyed dew that cometh on waking day. 

radiant Morning, salute the Sun, 

Boused like a huntsman to the chase, and with 

Thy buskined feet appear upon our hills. 



FAIR ELEANOR. 

THE bell struck one, and shook the silent tower ; 
The graves give up their dead : fair Eleanor 
Walked by the castle-gate, and looked in : 
A hollow groan ran through the dreary vaults. 

She shrieked aloud, and sunk upon the steps, 
On the cold stone her pale cheek. Sickly smells 
Of death issue as from a sepulchre, 
And all is silent but the sighing vaults. 



24 POETICAL SKETCHES. 

Chill Death withdraws his hand, and she revives : 
Amazed she finds herself upon her feet, 
And, like a ghost, through narrow passages 
Walking, feeling the oold walls with her hands. 

Fancy returns, and now she thinks of bones 
And grinning skulls, and corruptible death 
Wrapt in his shroud ; and now fancies she hears 
Deep sighs, and sees pale sickly ghosts gliding. 

At length, no fancy but reality 
Distracts her. A rushing sound, and the feet 
Of one that fled, approaches. Ellen stood, 
Like a dumb statue, froze to stone with fear. 

The wretch approaches, crying : " The deed is done ! 
Take this, and send it by whom thou wilt send ; 
It is my life send it to Eleanor : 
He's dead, and howling after me for blood 1 

" Take this," he cried ; and thrust into her arms 
A wet napkin, wrapt about ; then rushed 
Past, howling. She received into her arms 
Pale death, and followed on the wings of fear. 

They passed swift through the outer gate ; the wretch, 
Howling, leaped o'er the wall into the moat, 
Stifling in mud. Fair Ellen passed the bridge, 
And heard a gloomy voice cry " Is it done ? " 

As the deer wounded, Ellen flew over 

The pathless plain ; as the arrows that fly 

By night, destruction flies, and strikes in darkness. 

She fled from fear, till at her house arrived. 

Her maids await her ; on her bed she falls, 
That bed of joy where erst her lord hath pressed. 
"Ah woman's fear ! " she cried, " Ah cursed duke ! 
Ah my dear lord 1 ah wretched Eleanor I 

" My lord was like a flower upon the brows 
Of lusty May ! Ah life as frail as flower ! 
ghastly Death ! withdraw thy cruel hand ! 
Seek'st thou that flower to deck thy horrid temples ? 

" My lord was like a star in highest heaven 
Drawn down to earth by spells and wickedness ; 
My lord was like the opening eyes of Day, 
When western winds creep softly o'er the flowers. 

" But he is darkened ; like the summer's noon 
Clouded ; fall'n like the stately tree, cut down ; 
The breath of heaven dwelt among his leaves. 
Eleanor, weak woman, filled with woe 1 " 



SONG. 25 

Thus having spoke, she raised up her head, 
And saw the bloody napkin by her side, 
Which in her arms she brought ; and now, tenfold 
More terrified, saw it unfold itself. 

Her eyes were fixed ; the bloody cloth unfolds, 
Disclosing to her sight the murdered head 
Of her dear lord, all ghastly pale, clotted 
With gory blood ; it groaned, and thus it spake : 

" Eleanor, behold thy husband's head, 
Who, sleeping on the stones of yonder tower, 
Was reft of life by the accursed duke : 
A hired villain turned my sleep to death. 

" Eleanor, beware the cursed duke ; 
Oh give not him thy hand, now I am dead. 
He seeks thy love ; who, coward, in the nighu, 
Hired a villain to bereave my life." 

She sat with dead cold limbs, stiffened to stone ; 
She took the gory head up in her arms ; 
She kissed the pale lips ; she had no tears to shed ; 
She hugged it to her breast, and groaned her last. 



SONG. 

How sweet I roamed from field to field, 
And tasted all the summer's pride, 

Till I the Prince of Love beheld 

Who in the sunny beams did glide. 

He showed me lilies for my hair, 
And blushing roses for my brow ; 

He led me through his gardens fair 
Where all his golden pleasures grow. 

With sweet May-dews my wings were wet, 
And Phoebus fired my vocal rage ; 

He caught me in his silken net, 
And shut me in his golden cage. 

He loves to sit and hear me sing, 

Then, laughing, sports and plays with me 
Then stretches out my golden wing, 

And mocks my loss of liberty. 



26 POETICAL SKETCHES. 

SONG. 

MY silks and fine array, 
My smiles and languished air, 

By love are driven away ; 
And mournful lean Despair 

Brings me yew to deck my grave : 

Such end true lovers have. 

His face is fair as heaven 
When springing buds unfold ; 

Oh why to him was't given, 
Whose heart is wintry cold ? 

His breast is love's all-worshipped tomb, 

Where all love's pilgrims come. 

Bring me an axe and spade, 
Bring me a winding-sheet ; 

When I my grave have made, 
Let winds and tempests beat : 

Then down I'll lie, as cold as clay. 

True love doth pass away ! 



SONG. 

LOVE and harmony combine, 
And around our souls entwine, 
While thy branches mix with mine, 
And our roots together join. 

Joys upon our branches sit, 
Chirping loud and singing sweet ; 
Like gentle streams beneath our feet, 
Innocence and virtue meet. 

Thou the golden fruit dost bear, 
I am clad in flowers fair ; 
Thy sweet boughs perfume the air, 
And the turtle buildeth there. 

There she sits and feeds her young, 
Sweet I hear her mournful song ; 
And thy lovely leaves among 
There is Love ; I hear his tongue. 

There his charming nest doth lay, 
There he sleeps the night away ; 
There he sports along the day, 
And doth among our branches play. 



SONG. 27 

SONG. 



I LOVE the jocund dance, 

The softly-breathing song, 
Where innocent eyes do glance, 

And where lisps the maiden's tongue. 

I love the laughing vale, 

I love the echoing hill, 
Where mirth does never fail, 

And the jolly swain laughs his fill. 

I love the pleasant cot, 

I love the innocent bower, 
Where white and brown is our lot, 

Or fruit in the mid-day hour. 

I love the oaken seat 

Beneath the oaken tree, 
Where all the old villagers meet, 

And laugh our sports to see. 

I love our neighbours all, 
But, Kitty, I better love thee ; 

And love them I ever shall, 
But thou art all to me. 



SONG. 

MEMORY, hither come, 

And tune your merry notes : 
And, while upon the wind 

Your music floats, 
I'll pore upon the stream 
Where sighing lovers dream, 
And fish for fancies as they pass 
Within the watery glass. 

I'll drink of the clear stream, 
And hear the linnet's song, 

And there I'll lie and dream 
The day along : 

And, when night comes, I'll go 

To places fit for woe, 

Walking along the darkened valley 

With silent Melancholy. 



POETICAL SKETCHES. 

MA-D SONG. 

TUB wild winds weep, 

And the night is a-cold ; 
Come hither, Sleep, 

And my griefs enfold ! . . . 
But lo t the morning peeps 
Over the eastern steeps, 
And the rustling beds of dawn 
The earth do scorn. 

Lo I to the vault 

Of paved heaven, 
With sorrow fraught, 

My notes are driven : 
They strike the ear of Night, 

Make weep the eyes of Day ; 
They make mad the roaring winds, 

And with tempests play. 

Like a fiend in a cloud, 

With howling woe 
After night I do crowd 

And with night will go ; 
I turn my back to the east 
From whence comforts have increased ; 
For light doth seize my brain 
With frantic pain. 



SONG. 

FRESH from the dewy hill, the merry Year 
Smiles on my head, and mounts his flaming car ; 
Bound my young brows the laurel v.-reathes a shade, 
And rising glories beam around my head. 

My feet are winged, while o'er the dewy lawn 

I meet my maiden risen like the morn. 

Oh bless those holy feet, like angels' feet ; 

Oh bless those limbs, beaming with heavenly light ! 

Like as an angel glittering in the sky 
In times of innocence and holy joy ; 
The joyful shepherd stops his grateful song 
To hear the music of an angel's tongue. 

So, when she speaks, the voice of Heaven I hear ; 
So, when we walk, nothing impure comes near ; 
Each field seems Eden, and each calm retreat 
Each village seems the haunt of holy feet. 



TO THE MUSES. 29 

But, that sweet village where my black-eyed maid 
Closes her eyes in sleep beneath night's shade 
Whene'er I enter, more than mortal fire 
Burns in my soul, and does my song inspire. 



SONG. 

WHEN early Morn walks forth in sober grey, 
Then to my black-eyed maid I haste away. 
When Evening sits beneath her dusky bower, 
And gently sighs away the silent hour, 
The village bell alarms, away I go, 
And the vale darkens at my pensive woe. 

To that sweet village where my black-eyed maid 

Doth drop a tear beneath the silent shade 

I turn my eyes ; and pensive as I go 

Curse my black stars, and bless my pleasing woe. 

Oft, when the Summer sleeps among the trees, 
Whispering faint murmurs to the scanty breeze, 
I walk the village round ; if at her side 
A youth doth walk in stolen joy and pride, 
I curse my stars in bitter grief and woe, 
That made my love so high, and me so low. 

Oh should she e'er prove false, his limbs I'd tear 
And throw all pity on the burning air ! 
I'd curse bright fortune for my mixed lot, 
And then I'd die in peace, and be forgot. 



TO THE MUSES. 

WHETHEB on Ida's shady brow, 
Or in the chambers of the East, 

The chambers of the Sun, that now 
From ancient melody have ceased ; 

Whether in heaven ye wander fair, 
Or the green corners of the earth, 

Or the blue regions of the air 
Where the melodious winds have birth 

Whether on crystal rocks ye rove, 
Beneath the bosom of the sea, 

Wandering in many a coral grove ; 
Fair Nine, forsaking Poetry ; 



30 POETICAL SKETCHES. 

How have you lo/t the ancient love 
That barda of old enjoyed in you ! 

The languid strings do scarcely move, 
The sound it forced, the notes are few ! 



GWIN, KING OF NORWAY. 

COME, Kings, and listen to my song. 
When Gwin, the son of Nore, 

Over the nations of the North 
His cruel sceptre bore ; 

The Nobles of the land did feed 

Upon the hungry poor ; 
They tear the poor man's lamb, and drive 

The needy from their door. 

" The land is desolate ; our wives 

And children cry for bread ; 
Arise, and pull the tyrant down ! 

Let Gwin be humbled ! " 

Gordred the giant roused himself 

From sleeping in his cave ; 
He shook the hills, and in the clouds 

The troubled banners wave. 

Beneath them rolled, like tempests black, 
The numerous sons of blood ; 

Like lions' whelps, roaring abroad, 
Seeking their nightly food. 

Down Bleron's hill they dreadful rush, 
Their cry ascends the clouds ; 

The trampling horse and clanging anna 
Like rushing mighty floods I 

Their wives and children, weeping loud, 

Follow in wild array, 
Howling like ghosts, furious as wolves 

In the bleak wintry day. 

" Pull down the tyrant to the dust, 

Let Gwin be humbled," 
They cry, " and let ten thousand lives 

Pay for the tyrant's head 1 " 

From tower to tower the watchmen cry : 

" Gwin, the son of Nore, 
Arouse thyself I the nations, black 

Like clouds, come rolling o'er ! " 



GWIN, KING OF NORWAY. 

Gwin reared his shield, his palace shakes, 
His chiefs come rushing round ; 

Each like an awful thunder-cloud 
With voice of solemn sound : 

Like reared stones around a grave 
They stand around the King ; 

Then suddenly each seized his spear, 
And clashing steel does ring. 

The husbandman does leave his plough 
To wade through fields of gore ; 

The merchant binds his brows in steel, 
And leaves the trading shore ; 

The shepherd leaves his mellow pipe, 
And sounds the trumpet shrill ; 

The workman throws his hammer down 
To heave the bloody bill. 

Like the tall ghost of Barraton 

Who sports in stormy sky, 
Gwin leads his host as black as night 

When pestilence does fly, 

With horses and with chariots 

And all his spearmen bold 
March to the sound of mournful song, 

Like clouds around him rolled. 



31 



Gwin lifts his hand the nations halt ; 

" Prepare for war ! " he cries. 
Gordred appears ! his frowning brow 

Troubles our northern skies. 

The armies stand, like balances 

Held in, the Almighty's hand ; 
" Gwin, thou hast filled thy measure up : 

Thou'rt swept from out the land." 

And now the raging armies rushed 

Like warring mighty seas ; 
The heavens are shook with roaring war, 

The dust ascends the skies I 

Earth smokes with blood, and groans and shakes 

To drink her children's gore, 
A sea of blood ; nor can the eye 

See to the trembling shore. 



32 POETICAL SKETCHES. 

And on the verge of this wild sea 

Famine and death do cry ; 
The cries of women and of babes 

Over the field do fly. 

The king is seen raging afar, 

With all his men of might ; 
Like blazing comets scattering death 

Through the red feverous night. 

Beneath his arm like sheep they die, 

And groan upon the plain ; 
The battle faints, and bloody men 

Fight upon hills of slain. 

Now death is sick, and riven men 

Labour and toil for life ; 
Steed rolls on steed, and shield on shield, 

Sunk in this sea of strife ! 

The God of War is drunk with blood, 
The earth doth faint and fail ; 

The stench of blood makes sick the heavens, 
Ghosts glut the throat of hell ! 

Oh what have Kings to answer for 

Before that awful throne, 
When thousand deaths for vengeance cry, 

And ghosts accusing groan ! 

Like blazing comets in the sky 
That shake the stars of light, 

Which drop like fruit unto the earth 
Through the fierce burning night ; 

Like these did Gwin and Gordred meet, 

And the first blow decides ; 
Down from the brow unto the breast 

Gordred his head divides 1 

Gwin fell : the Sons of Norway fled, 

All that remained alive ; 
The rest did fill the vale of death, 

For them the eagles strive. 

The river Dorman rolled their blood 

Into the northern sea ; 
Who mourned his sons, and overwhelmed 

The pleasant south country. 



AN IMITATION OF SPENSER. 33 



AN IMITATION OF SPENSER. 

GOLDEN Apollo, that through heaven wide 
Scatter'st the rays of light, and truth his beams, 

In lucent words ray darkling verses dight, 
And wash my earthy mind in thy clear streams, 
That wisdom may descend in fairy dreams, 

All while the jocund Hours in thy train 
Scatter their fancies at thy poet's feet ; 

And, when thou yield'st to Night thy wide domain, 

Let rays of truth enlight his sleeping brain. 

For brutish Pan in vain might thee assay 

With tinkling sounds to dash thy nervous verse, 

Sound without sense ; yet in his rude affray 
(For Ignorance is Folly's leasing nurse, 
And love of Folly needs none other's curse) 

Midas the praise hath gained of lengthened ears, 
For which himself might deem him ne'er the worse 

To sit in council with his modern peers, 
And judge of tinkling rhymes and elegances terse. 

And thou, Mercurius, that with winged bow 

Dost mount aloft into the yielding sky, 
And through heaven's halls thy airy flight dost throw, 

Entering with holy feet to where on high 

Jove weighs the counsel of futurity ; 
Then, laden with eternal fate, dost go 

Down, like a falling star, from autumn sky, 
And o'er the surface of the silent deep dost fly : 

If thou arrivest at the sandy shore 

Where nought but envious hissing adders dwell, 
Thy golden rod, thrown on the dusty floor, 

Can charm to harmony with potent spell ; 

Such is sweet Eloquence, that does dispel 
Envy and Hate, that thirst for human gore ; 

And cause in sweet society to dwell 

Vile savage minds that lurk in lonely cell. 

Mercury, assist my labouring sense 
That round the circle of the world would fly, 

As the wing'd eagle scorns the towery fence 
Of Alpine hills round his high aery, 
And searches through the corners of the sky, 

Sports in the clouds to hear the thunder's sound, 
And see the winged lightnings as they fly ; 

Then, bosomed in an amber cloud, around 

Plumes his wide wings, and seeks Sol's palace high. 
VOL. III. 3 



34 POETICAL SKETCHES. 

And thou, O Warrior maid invincible, 
Armed with the terrors of Almighty Jove, 

Pallas, Minerva, maiden terrible, 
Lov'st thou to walk the peaceful solemn grove, 
In solemn gloom of branches interwove ? 

Or bear'st thy aegis o'er the burning field 
Where like the sea the waves of battle move? 

Or have thy soft piteous eyes beheld 

The weary wanderer through the desert rove ? 
Or does the afflicted man thy heavenly bosom move ? 



BLIND-MAN'S BUFF. 

WHEN silver snow decks Susan's clothes, 
And jewel hangs at th' shepherd's nose, 
The blushing bank is all my care, 
With hearth so red, and walls so fair. 
" Heap the sea-coal, come, heap it higher ; 
The oaken log lay on the fire." 
The well-washed stools, a circling row, 
With lad and lass, how fair the show 1 
The merry can of nut-brown ale, 
The laughing jest, the love-sick tale, 
Till, tired of chat, the game begins 
The lasses prick the lads with pins. 
Roger from Dolly twitched the stool ; 
She, falling, kissed the ground, poor fool ! 
She blushed so red, with sidelong glance 
At hobnail Dick, who grieved the chance. 
But now for Blind-man's Buff they call ; 
Of each incumbrance clear the hall. 

Jenny her silken kerchief folds, 

And blear-eyed Will the black lot holds. 

Now laughing stops, with " Silence, hush ! " 

And Peggy Pout gives Sam a push. 

The Blind-man's arms, extended wide, 

Sam slips between : " Oh woe betide 

Thee, clumsy Will ! "But tittering Kate 

Is penned up in the corner strait I 

And now Will's eyes beheld the play, 

He thought his face was t'other way. 

" Now, Kitty, now I what chance hast thou ? 

Roger so near thee trips, I vow ! " 

She catches him then Roger ties 

His own head up but not his eyes ; 

For through the slender cloth he sees, 

And runs at 8am, who slips with ease 






A WAR SONG. 35 

His clumsy hold ; and dodging round, 

Sukey is tumbled on the ground. 

" See what it is to play unfair ! 

Where cheating is, there's mischief there." 

But Roger still pursues the chase, 

" He sees ! he sees ! " cries softly Grace ; 

" Eoger, thou, unskilled in art, 

Must, surer bound, go through thy part ! " 

Now Kitty, pert, repeats the rhymes, 

And Roger turns him round three times, 

Then pauses ere he starts. But Dick 

Was mischief -bent upon a trick : 

Down on his hands and knees he lay 

Directly in the Blind-man's way, 

Then cries out " Hem ! " Hodge heard, and ran 

With hood- winked chance sure of his man ; 

But down he came. Alas, how frail 

Our best of hopes, how soon they fail ! 

With crimson drops he stains the ground ; 

Confusion startles all around. 

Poor piteous Dick supports his head, 

And fain would cure the hurt he made. 

But Kitty hasted with a key, 

And down his back they straight convey 

The cold relief : the blood is stayed, 

And Hodge again holds up his head. 

Such are the fortunes of the game ; 
And those who play should stop the same 
By wholesome laws, such as All those 
Who on the blinded man impose 
Stand in his stead ; as, long agone, 
When men were first a nation grown, 
Lawless they lived, till wantonness 
And liberty began to increase, 
And one man lay in another's way ; 
Then laws were made to keep fair play. 



A WAR SONG. 

TO ENGLISHMEN. 

PREPARE, prepare the iron helm of war, 
Bring forth the lots, cast in the spacious orb ; 
The Angel of Fate turns them with mighty hands, 
And casts them out upon the darkened earth ! 

Prepare, prepare ! 
VOL. III. 3 * 



36 POETICAL SKETCHES. 

Prepare your hearts for Death's cold hand ! prepare 
Your souls for flight, your bodies for the earth ! 
Prepare your arms for glorious victory ! 
Prepare your eyes to meet a holy God ! 

Prepare, prepare 1 

Whose fatal scroll is that ? Methinks 'tis mine ! 
Why sinks my heart, why faltereth my tongue ? 
Had I three lives, I'd die in such a cause, 
And rise, with ghosts, over the well-fought field. 
Prepare, prepare ! 

The arrows of Almighty God are drawn ! 
Angels of Death stand in the louring heavens ! 
Thousands of souls must seek the realms of light, 
And walk together on the clouds of heaven ! 
Prepare, prepare ! 

Soldiers, prepare ! Our cause is Heaven's cause ; 
Soldiers, prepare ! Be worthy of our cause : 
Prepare to meet our fathers in the sky : 
Prepare, troops that are to fall to-day ! 
Prepare, prepare ! 

Alfred shall smile, and make his heart rejoice ; 
The Norman William, and the learned Clerk, 
And Lion-Heart, and black-browed Edward with 
His loyal queen, shall rise, and welcome us ! 
Prepare, prepare ! 



\* The order of the above sketches follows, for convenience of 
comparison, that of the Aldine Edition. The original sequence, 
given in Mr. Quaritch's facsimile, will be found above, Volume I., 
p. 170 in the chapter containing other " Poetical Sketches " not 

rrprintod hero. 

See ." Notes to Poetical Sketches," tic , p. n*. 



SONGS OF INNOCENCE. 

(ENGRAVED 1789.) 



INTRODUCTION. 

PIPING down the valleys wild, 
Piping songs of pleasant glee, 

On a cloud I saw a child, 
And he laughing said to me : 

" Pipe a song about a Lamb ! " 
So I piped with merry cheer. 

" Piper, pipe that song again ; " 
So I piped : he wept to hear. 

" Drop thy pipe, thy happy pipe ; 

Sing thy songs of happy cheer ! 
So I sang the same again, 

While he wept with joy to hear. 

" Piper, sit thee down and write 
In a book, that all may read." 

So he vanished from tny sight ; 
And I plucked a hollow reed, 

And I made a rural pen, 
And I stained the water clear, 

And I wrote my happy songs 
Every child may joy to hear. 



THE SHEPHERD. 

How sweet is the shepherd's sweet lot ! 
From the morn to the evening he strays ; 
He shall follow his sheep all the day, 
And his tongue shall be filled with praise. 

For he hears the lambs' innocent call, 
And he hears the ewes' tender reply ; 
He is watchful while they are in peace, 
For they know when their shepherd is nigh 



BONUS OF INNOCENCE. 



THE ECHOING GREEN. 

THB son does arise, 

And make happy the skies ; 

The merry bells ring, 

To welcome the Spring ; 

The skylark and thrush, 

The birds of the bush, 

Sing louder around 

To the bells' cheerful sound ; 

While our sports shall be seen 

On the echoing green. 

Old John, with white hair, 
Does laugh away care, 
Sitting under the oak, 
Among the old folk. 
They laugh at our play, 
And soon they all say, 
" Such, such were the joys 
When we all girls and boys- 
In our youth-time were seen 
On the echoing green." 

Till the little ones, weary, 
No more can be merry : 
The sun does descend, 
And our sports have an end. 
Round the laps of their mothers 
Many bisters and brothers, 
Like birds in their uest, 
Are ready for rest, 
And sport no more seen 
On the darkening green. 



THE LAMB. 

LITTLE lamb, who made thee 
Dost thou know who made thee, 
Gave thee life, and bade thee feed 
By the stream and o'er the mead ; 
Guve thee clothing of delight, 
Softest clothing, woolly, bright; 
Gave thee such a tender voice, 
Making all the vales rejoice? 

Little lamb, who made thee ? 

Dost thou know who made thee? 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOY. 39 

Little lamb, I'll tell thee; 

Little lamb, I'll tell thee : 
He is called by thy name, 
For He calls himself a Lamb. 
Ho is meek, and He is mild, 
He became a little child. 
I a child, and thou a lamb, 
We are called by his name. 

Little lamb, God bless thee ! 

Little lamb, God bless thee ! 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOY. 

MY mother bore me in the southern wild, 
And I am black, but oh my soul is white ! 

White as an angel is the English child, 
But I am black, as if bereaved of light. 

My mother taught me underneath a tree, 
And, sitting down before the heat of day, 

She took me on her lap and kissed me, 
And, pointing to the East, began to say : 

" Look on the rising sun : there God does live, 
And gives his light, and gives his heat away, 

And flowers and trees and beasts and men receive 
Comfort in morning, joy in the noonday. 

" And we are put on earth a little space, 
That we may learn to bear the beams of love 

And these black bodies and this sunburnt face 
Are but a cloud, and like a shady grove. 

" For, when our souls have learned the heat to bear 
The cloud will vanish, we shall hear His voice, 

Saying, ' Come out from the grove, my love and care 
And round my golden tent like lambs rejoice.' " 

Thus did my mother say, and kissed me, 

And thus I say to little English boy. 
When I from black, and he from white cloud free 

And round the tent of God like lambs we joy 

I'll shade him from the heat till he can bear 
To lean in joy upon our Father's knee ; 

And then I'll stand and stroke his silver hair, 
And be like him, and he will then love me. 



40 SONUS OF INNOCENCE. 

THE BLOSSOM. 
MEBBY, merry sparrow ! 
Under leaves so green 
A happy blossom 
Sees you, swift as arrow, 
Seek your cradle narrow, 
Near my bosom. 
Pretty, pretty robin I 
Under leaves so green 
A happy blossom 
Hears you sobbing, sobbing, 
Pretty, pretty robin, 
Near my bosom. 



THE CHIMNEY-SWEEPER. 

WHEN my mother died I was very young, 
And my father sold me while yet my tongue 
Could scarcely cry " Weep ! weep ! weep ! weep ! " 
So your chimneys I sweep, and in soot I sleep. 
There's little Tom Dacre, who cried when his heud, 
That curled like a lamb's back, was shaved ; so I said, 
"Hush, Tom ! never mind it, for, when your head's bare, 
You know that the soot cannot spoil your white hair." 

And so he was quiet, and that very night, 

As Tom was a-sleeping, he had such a sight ! 

That thousands of sweepers, Dick, Joe, Ned, and Jack, 

Were all of them locked up in coffins of black. 

And by came an angel, who had a bright key, 

And he opened the coflins, and set them all free ; 

Then down a green plain, leaping, laughing, they run, 

And wash in a river, and shine in the sun. 

Then naked and white, all their bags left behind, 

They rise upon clouds, and sport in the wind ; 

And the Angel told Tom, if he'd be a good boy, 

He'd have God for his father, and never want joy. 

And so Tom awoke, and we rose in the dark, 

And got with our bags and our brushes to work. 

Though the morning was cold, Tom was happy and warm : 

So, if all do their duty, they need not fear harm. 



THE LITTLE BOY LOST. 

" FATHER, father, where are you going ? 

Oh do not walk so fast ! 
Speak, father, speak to your little boy, 

Or else I shall be lost." 



A CRADLE SONG. 

The night was dark, no father was there, 

The child was wet with dew ; 
The mire was deep, and the child did weep, 

And away the vapour flew. 



41 



THE LITTLE BOY FOUND. 

THE little boy lost in the lonely fen, 

Led by the wandering light, 
Began to cry, but God, ever nigh, 

Appeared like his father, in white. 

He kissed the child, and by the hand led, 

And to his mother brought, 
Who in sorrow pale, through the lonely dale, 

The little boy weeping sought. 



LAUGHING SONG. 

WHEN the green woods laugh with the voice of joy, 
And the dimpling stream runs- laughing by ; 
When the air does laugh with our merry wit, 
And the green hill laughs with the noise of it ; 

When the meadows laugh with lively green, 
And the grasshopper laughs in the merry scene ; 
When Mary and Susan and Emily 
With their sweet round mouths sing " Ha ha he ! ' 

When the painted birds laugh in the shade, 
Where our table with cherries and nuts is spread : 
Come live, and be merry, and join with me, 
To sing the sweet chorus of " Ha ha he ! " 



A CRADLE SONG. 

SWEET dreams, form a shade 
O'er my lovely infant's head ! 
Sweet dreams of pleasant streams 
By happy, silent, moony beams ! 

Sweet Sleep, with soft down 
Weave thy brows an infant crown 
Sweep Sleep, angel mild, 
Hover o'er my happy child ! 

Sweet smiles, in the night 
Hover over my delight ! 
Sweet smiles, mother's smile, 
All the livelong night beguile. 



SONGS OF INNOCENCE. 

Sweet moans, dovclikc sighs, 
Chase not slumber from thine eyes ! 
Sweet moan, sweeter smile, 
All the dovelikc moans beguile. 

Sleep, sleep, happy child ! 
All creation slept and smiled. 
Sleep, sleep, happy sleep, 
While o'er thee doth mother weep. 

Sweet babe, in thy face 
Holy image I can trace ; 
Sweet babe, once like thee 
Thy Maker lay, and wept for me : 

Wept for me, for thee, for all, 
When He was an infant small. 
Thou His image ever see, 
Heavenly face that smiles on thee ! 

Smiles on thee, on me, on all, 
Who became an infant small; 
Infant smiles are his own smiles ; 
Heaven and earth to peace beguiles. 



THE DIVINE IMAGE. 

To Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love, 
All pray in their distress, 

And to these virtues of delight 
Return their thankfulness. 

For Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love, 

Is God our Father dear ; 
And Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love, 

Is man, his child and care. 

For Mercy has a human heart 

Pity, a human face ; 
And Love, the human form divine; 

And Peace, the human dress. 

Then every man, of every clime, 
That prays in his distress, 

Prays to the human form divine : 
Love, Mercy, Pity, Peace. 

And all must love the human form, 
In heathen, Turk, or Jew. 

Where Mercy, Love, and Pity dwell, 
There God is dwelling too. 



NIGHT. 43 

HOLY THURSDAY. 

'TWAS on a Holy Thursday, their innocent faces clean, 
Came children walking two and two, in red, and blue, and green : 
Grey-headed beadles walked before, with wands as white as snow, 
Till into the high dome of Paul's they like Thames waters flow. 

Oh what a multitude they seemed, these flowers of London town ! 
Seated in companies they sit, with radiance all their own. 
The hum of multitudes was there, but multitudes of lambs, 
Thousands of little boys and girls raising their innocent hands. 

Now like a mighty wind they raise to heaven the voice of song, 
Or like harmonious thunderings the seats of heaven among : 
Beneath them sit the aged men, wise guardians of the poor. 
Then cherish pity, lest you drive an angel from your door. 



NIGHT. 

THE sun descending in the west, 
The evening star does shine ; 
The birds are silent in their nest, 
And I must seek for mine. 

The moon, like a flower 

In heaven's high bower, 

With silent delight, 

Sits and smiles on the night. 
Farewell, green fields and happy grove, 
Where flocks have ta'en delight. 
Where lambs have nibbled, silent move 
The feet of angels bright ; 

Unseen, they pour blessing, 

And joy without ceasing, 

On each bud and blossom, 

And each sleeping bosom. 

They look in every thoughtless nest 
Where birds are covered warm ; 
They visit caves of every beast, 
To keep them all from harm : 

If they see any weeping 

That should have been sleeping, 

They pour sleep on their head, 

And sit down by their bed. 
When wolves and tigers howl for prey, 
They pitying stand and weep ; 
Seeking to drive their thirst away, 
And keep them from the sheep. 

But, if they rush dreadful, 

The angels, most heedful, 

Keceive each mild spirit, 

New worlds to inherit. 



44 SONGS OF INNOCENCE. 

And there the lion's ruddy eyes 
Shall flow with tears of gold : 
And pitying the tender cries, 
And walking round the fold : 

Saying : " Wrath by His meekness, 
And, by His health, sickness, 
Are driven away 
From our immortal day. 

" And now beside thee, bloating lamb, 
I can lie down and sleep, 
Or think on Him who bore thy name, 
Graze after thec, and weep. 
For, washed in life's river, 
My bright mane for ever 
Shall shine like the gold, 
As I guard o'er the fold." 



SPRING. 

SOUND the flute ! 
Now 'tis mute ! 
Birds delight, 
Day and night, 
Nightingale, 
In the dale, 
Lark in sky, 
Merrily, 
Merrily merrily to welcome in the year. 

Little boy, 
Full of joy ; 
Little girl, 
Sweet and small ; 
Cock does crow, 
So do you ; 
Merry voice, 
Infant noise ; 
Merrily, merrily to welcome in the year. 

Little lamb, 
Here I am ; 
Come and lick 
My white neck ; 
Let me pull 
Your soft wool ; 
Let me kiss 
Your soft face ; 
Merrily, merrily we welcome in the year. 



\ 



A DREAM. 



45 



NURSE'S SONG. 

WHEN the voices of children are heard on the green, 

And laughing is heard on the hill, 
My heart is at rest within my breast, 

And everything else is still. 
" Then come home, my children, the sun is gone down, 

And the dews of night arise ; 
Come, come, leave off play, and let us away, 

Till the morning appears in the skies." 

" No, no, let us play, for it is yet day, 

And we cannot go to sleep ; 
Besides, in the sky the little birds fly, 

And the hills are all covered with sheep." 
" Well, well, go and play till the light fades away, 

And then go home to bed." 
The little ones leaped, and shouted, and laughed, 

And all the hills echoed. 



INFANT JOY. 

" I HAVE no name ; 
I am but two days old." 
What shall I call thee ? 
" I happy am, 
Joy is my name." 
Sweet joy befall thee ! 

Pretty joy ! 

Sweet joy, but two days old. 

Sweet joy I call thee : 

Thou dost smile, 

I sing the while ; 

Sweet joy befall thee 1 



A DEEAM. 

ONCE a dream did weave a shade 
O'er my angel-guarded bed, 
That an emmet lost its way 
Where on grass methought I lay. 

Troubled, wildered, and forlorn, 
Dark, benighted, travel- worn, 
Over many a tangled spray, 
All heart-broke, I heard her say : 



SONGS OP INNOCENCE. 

" Oh my children ! do they cry, 
Do they hear their father sigh ? 
Now they look abroad to see, 
Now return and weep for me." 

Pitying, I dropped a tear : 
But I saw a glow-worm near, 
Who replied, " What wailing wight 
Calls the watchman of the night ? 

" I am set to light the ground, 
While the beetle goes his round : 
Follow now the beetle's hum ; 
Little wanderer, hie thee home ! " 



ON ANOTHER'S SORROW. 

CAN I see another's woe, 
And not be in sorrow too? 
Can I see another's grief, 
And not seek for kind relief ? 

Can I see a falling tear, 
And not feel my sorrow's share ? 
Can a, father see his child 
Weep, nor be with sorrow filled ? 

Can a mother sit and hear 
An infant groan, an infant fear? 
No, no ! never can it be ! 
Never, never can it be I 

And can He who smiles on all 
Hear the wren with sorrows small, 
Hear the small bird's grief and care, 
Hear the woes that infants bear 

And not sit beside the nest, 
Pouring pity in their breast, 
And not sit the cradle near, 
Weeping tear on infant's tear ? 

And not sit both night and day, 
Wiping all our tears away ? 
Oh no ! never can it be 1 
Never, never can it be ! 

He doth give his joy to all : 
He becomes an infant small, 
He becomes a man of woe, 
He doth feel the sorrow too. 



ON ANOTHER'S SORROW. 47 

Think not them canst sigh a sigh, 
And thy Maker is not by : 
Think not thou canst weep a tear, 
And thy Maker is not near. 

Oh He gives to us his joy, 
That our grief He may destroy : 
Till our grief is fled and gone 
He doth sit by us and moan. 



%* " The Voice of the Ancient Bard " is printed by Gilchrist at 
the close of this section, professedly on the authority of a copy called 
" Blake's own," by Mr. Blake, who sent it to Dr. Jebb, Bishop of 
Limerick, after Blake's death. (Gilchrist, Vol. I., p. 410.) 

The poem, wherever it truly belongs, is an after-thought. An 
undoubtedly authentic copy, equally late in date, places it at the end 
of the " Songs of Experience." 

See " Notes to Poetical Sketches," &c., p. 88. 



SONGS OF EXPERIENCE. 

(ENGRAVED 1794.) 



INTRODUCTION. 

HKAR the voice of the Bard, 

Who present, past, and future, sees ; 

Whose ears have heard 

The Holy Word 

That walked among the ancient trees ; 

Calling the lapsed soul, 

And weeping in the evening dew ; 

That might control 

The starry pole, 

And fallen, fallen light renew ! 

" O Earth, O Earth, return I 

Arise from out the dewy grass ! 

Night is worn, 

And the morn 

Rises from the slumbrous mass. 

" Turn away no more ; 

Why wilt thou turn away? 

The starry floor, 

The watery shore, 

Are given thee till the break of day." 



EARTH'S ANSWER. 

EARTH raised up her head 

From the darkness dread and drear, 

Her light fled, 

Stony, dread, 

And her locks covered with grey despair. 

" Prisoned on watery shore, 

Starry jealousy docs keep my den 

Cold and hoar ; 

Weeping o'er.j 

I hear the father of the ancient men. 



HOLY THURSDAY. 49 

Selfish father of men ! 
Cruel, jealous, selfish fear ! 
Can delight, 
Chained in night, 
The virgins of youth and morning bear ? 

" Does spring hide its joy, 

When buds and blossoms grow ? 

Does the sower 

Sow by night, 

Or the ploughman in darkness plough ? 

"Break this heavy chain, 

That does freeze my bones around ! 

Selfish, vain, 

Eternal bane, 

That free love with bondage bound." 



THE CLOD AND THE PEBBLE. 

"LovE seeketh not itself to please, 

Nor for itself hath any care, 
But for another gives its ease, 

And builds a heaven in hell's despair." 

So sang a little clod of clay, 

Trodden with the cattle's feet, 
But a pebble of the brook 

Warbled out these metres meet : 

" Love seeketh only Self to please, 

To bind another to its delight, 
Joys in another's loss of ease, 

And builds a hell in heaven's despite." 



HOLY THURSDAY. 

Is this a holy thing to see 
In a rich and fruitful land, 

Babes reduced to misery, 
Fed with cold and usurous hand ? 

Is that trembling cry a song? 

Can it be a song of joy ? 
And so many children poor ? 

It is a land of poverty ! 

And their sun does never shine, 

And their fields are bleak and bare, 
And their ways are filled with thorns : 

It is eternal winter there. 
VOL. III. 



50 SONGS OF EXPERIENCE. 

For where'er the sun does shine, 
And where'er the rain does fall, 

Babes should never hunger there, 
Nor poverty the mind appall. 



THE LITTLE GIRL LOST. 

IN futurity 

I prophetic see 

That the earth from sleep 

(Grave the sentence deep) 

Shall arise, and seek 
For her Maker meek ; 
And the desert wild 
Become a garden mild. 

In the southern clime, 
Where the summer's prime 
Never fades away, 
Lovely Lyca lay. 

Seven summers old 
Lovely Lyca told. 
She had wandered long, 
Hearing wild birds' song. 

" Sweet sleep, come to me 
Underneath this tree ; 
Do father, mother, weep ? 
Where can Lyca sleep ? 

" Lost in desert wild 
Is your little child. 
How can Lyca sleep 
If her mother weep ? 

" If her heart does ache, 
Then let Lyca wake ; 
If my mother sleep, 
Lyca shall not weep. 

" Frowning, frowning night, 
O'er this desert bright 
Let thy moon arise, 
While I close my eyes." 

Sleeping Lyca lay 
While the beasts of prey, 
Come from caverns deep, 
Viewed the maid asleep. 



THE LITTLE GIRL FODND. 51 

The kingly lion stood, 
And the virgin viewed : 
Then he gambolled round 
O'er the hallowed ground. 

Leopards, tigers, play 
Bound her as she lay ; 
While the lion old 
Bowed his mane of gold, 

And her breast did lick 
And upon her neck, 
From his eyes of flame, 
Ruby tears there came ; 

While the lioness 
Loosed her slender dress, 
And naked they conveyed 
To caves the sleeping maid. 



THE LITTLE GIRL FOUND. 

ALL the night in woe 
Lyca's parents go 
Over valleys deep, 
While the deserts weep. 

Tired and woe-begone, 
Hoarse with making moan, 
Arm in arm, seven days 
They traced the desert ways. 

Seven nights they sleep 
Among shadows deep, 
And dream they see their child 
Starved in desert wild. 

Pale through pathless ways 
The fancied image strays, 
Famished, weeping, weak, 
With hollow piteous shriek. 

Rising from unrest, 
The trembling woman presse 
With feet of weary woe ; 
She could no further go. 

In his arms he bore 
Her, armed with sorrow sore ; 
Till before their way 
A couching lion lay. 
VOL, in. 



52 BONOS OK CXPEKIENCE. 

Turning back was vain : 
Soon his heavy mane 
Bore them to the ground, 
Then he stalked around, 

Smelling to his prey ; 
But their fears allay 
When he licks their hands, 
And silent by them stands. 

They look upon his eyes, 
Filled with deep surprise ; 
And wondering behold 
A spirit armed in gold. 

On his head a crown, 
On his shoulders down 
Flowed his golden hair. 
Gone was all their care. 

" Follow me," he said ; 
" Weep not for the maid ; 
In my palace deep, 
Lyca lies asleep." 

Then they followed 
Where the vision led, 
And saw their sleeping child 
Among tigers wild. 

To this day they dwell 
In a lonely dell, 
Nor fear the wolvish howl 
Nor the lion's growl. 



THE CHIMNEY SWEEPER. 

A LITTLE black thing among the snow, 
Crying " weep 1 weep ! " in notes of woe 1 
" Where are thy father and mother ? Say 1 " 
" They are both gone up to the church to pray. 

" Because I was happy upon the heath, 
And smiled among the winter's snow, 
They clothed me in the clothes of death, 
And taught me to sing the notes of woe. 

" And because I am happy and dance and sing, 
They think they have done me no injury, 
And are gone to praise God and his priest and king. 
Who make up a heaven of our misery." 






THE FLY. 53 

NURSE'S SONG. 

WHEN the voices of children are heard on the green, 
And whisperings are in the dale, 
The days of my youth rise fresh in my mind, 
My face turns green and pale. 

Then come home, my children, the sun is gone down, 

And the dews of night arise ; 
Your spring and your day are wasted in play, 
And your winter and night in disguise. 



THE SICK ROSE. 

EOSE, thou art sick ! 

The invisible worm, 
That flies in the night, 

In the howling storm, 

Has found out thy bed 

Of crimson joy, 
And his dark secret love 

Does thy life destroy. 



THE FLY. 

LITTLE Fly, 
Thy summer's play 
My thoughtless hand 
Has brushed away. 

Am not I 
Aflylikethee? 
Or art not thou 
A man like me ? 

For I dance, 
And drink, and sing, 
Till some blind hand 
Shall brush my wing. 

If thought is life 

And strength and breath 

And the want 

Of thought is death ; 

Then am I 
A happy fly, 
If I live, 
Or if I die. 



54 SONGK OF EXPERIENCE. 

THE ANGEL. 

I I.UKAM r a dream I What can it mean ? 
And that I was a maiden Queen 
Guarded by an Angel mild : 
Witless woo was ne'er beguiled ! 

And I wept both night and day, 
And he wiped my tears away ; 
And I wept both day and night, 
And hid from him my heart's delight. 

So he took his wings, and fled ; 
Then the morn blushed rosy red. 
I dried my tears, and armed my fears 
With ten-thousand shields and spears. 

Soon my Angel came again ; 
I was armed, he came in vain ; 
For the time of youth was fled, 
And grey hairs were on my head. 



THE TIGER. 

TIGER, tiger, burning bright 
In the forests of the night, 
What immortal hand or eye 
Could frame thy fearful symmetry ? 

In what distant deeps or skies 
Burnt the fire of thine eyes ? 
On what wings dare he aspire ? 
What the hand dare seize the fire ? 

And what shoulder and what art 
Could twist the sinews of thy heart ? 
And, when thy heart began to beat, 
What dread hand and what dread feet ? 

What the hammer? what the chain? 
In what furnace was thy brain ? - 
What the anvil ? what dread grasp 
Dare its deadly terrors clasp ? 

When the stars threw down their spears, 
And watered heaven with their tears, 
Did he smile his work to see ? 
Did he who made the lamb make thee ? 

Tiger, tiger, burning bright 
In the forests of the night, 
What immortal hand or eye 
Dare frame thy fearful symmetry ? 






THE GARDEN OF LOVE. 55 

MY PRETTY ROSE TREE. 

A FLOWER was offered to me, 

Such a flower as May never bore ; 
But I said " I've a pretty rose tree," 

And I passed the sweet flower o'er. 

Then I went to my pretty rose tree, 

To tend her by day and by night ; 
But my rose turned away with jealousy, 

And her thorns were my only delight. 



AH SUNFLOWER. 

AH Sunflower, weary of time, 
\Vho countest the steps of the sun ; 

Seeking after that sweet golden clime 
Where the traveller's journey is done ; 

Where the Youth pined away with desire, 
And the pale virgin shrouded in snow, 

Arise from their graves, and aspire 
Where my Sunflower wishes to go ! 



THE LILY. 

THE modest Eose puts forth a thorn, 
The humble sheep a threat'ning horn : 
While the Lily white shall in love delight, 
Nor a thorn nor a threat stain her beauty bright. 



THE GARDEN OF LOVE. 

(See note at end of Songs of Experience.) 
I LAID me down upon a bank, 

Where Love lay sleeping ; 
I heard among the rushes dank 

Weeping, weeping. 

Then I went to the heath and the wild, 
To the thistles and thorns of the waste ; 

And they told me how they were beguiled, 
Driven out, and compelled to be chaste. 

I went to the Garden of Love, 
And saw what I never had seen ; 

A Chapel was built in the midst, 
Where I used to play on the green. 



56 bO.NU* UF EXPERIENCE. 



And the gates of this Chapel were shut 
And ' Thou shalt not " writ over the door ; 

So I turned to the Garden of Love 
That so many sweet flowers bore. 

And I saw it was filled with graves, 
And tombstones where flowers should be ; 

And priests in black gowns were walking their rounds, 
And binding with briars my joys and desires. 



THE LITTLE VAGABOND. 

DEAR mother, dear mother, the Church is cold ; 

But the Alehouse is healthy, and pleasant, and warm. 

Besides, I can tell where I am used well ; 

The poor parsons with wind like a blown bladder swell. 

But, if at the Church they would give us some ale, 
And a pleasant fire our souls to regale, 
We'd sing and we'd pray all the livelong day, 
Nor ever once wish from the Church to stray. 

Then the Parson might preach, and drink, and sing, 
And we'd be as happy as birds in the spring ; 
And modest Dame Lurch, who is always at church, 
Would not have bandy children, nor fasting, nor birch. 

And God, like a father, rejoicing to see 

His children as pleasant and happy as he, 

Would have no more quarrel with the Devil or the barrel, 

But kiss him, and give him both drink and apparel. 



LONDON. 

I WANDER through each chartered street, 
Near where the chartered Thames does flow, 

A mark in every face I meet, 
Marks of weakness, marks of woe. 

In every cry of every man, 

In every infant's cry of fear, 
In every voice, in every ban, 

The mind-forged manacles I hear : 

How the chimney-sweeper's cry 

Every blackening church appals, 
And the hapless soldier's sigh 

Buns in blood down palace-walls. 

But most, through midnight streets I hear 

How the youthful harlot's curse. 
Blasts the new-born infant's tear, 

And blights with plagues the marriage-hearse. 



CHRISTIAN FORBEARANCE. 57 

THE HUMAN ABSTRACT. 

PITY would be no more 

If we did not make somebody poor, 

And Mercy no more could be 

If all were as happy as we. 

And mutual fear brings Peace, 

Till the selfish loves increase ; 

Then Cruelty knits a snare, 

And spreads his baits with care. 

He sits down with his holy fears, 

And waters the ground with tears ; 

Then Humility takes its root 

Underneath his foot. 

Soon spreads the dismal shade 

Of Mystery over his head, 

And the caterpillar and fly 

Feed on the Mystery. 

And it bears the fruit of Deceit, 

Kuddy and sweet to eat, 

And the raven his nest has made 

In its thickest shade. 

The gods of the earth and sea 

Sought through nature to find this tree, 

But their search was all in vain : 

There grows one in the human Brain. 



INFANT SORROW. 

MY mother groaned, my father wept : 
Into the dangerous world I leapt, 
Helpless, naked, piping loud, 
Like a fiend hid in a cloud. 
Struggling in my father's hands, 
Striving against my swaddling-bands, 
Bound and weary, I thought best 
To sulk upon my mother's breast. 



CHRISTIAN FORBEARANCE. 

I WAS angry with my friend : 

I told my wrath, my wrath did end. 

I was angry with my foe : 

I told it not, my wrath did grow. 

And I watered it in fears 

Night and morning with my tears, 

And I sunned it with smiles 

And with soft deceitful wiles. 



58 SONGS OF BXPKRIBNCK. 

And it grow both day and night, 
Till it bore an apple bright, 
And my foe beheld it shine, 
And he knew that it was mine, 

And into my garden stole 

When the night had veiled the pole ; 

In the morning, glad, I see 

My foe outstretched beneath the tree. 



A LITTLE BOY LOST. 

NOUGHT loves another as itself, 

Nor venerates another so, 
Nor is it possible to thought 

A greater than itself to know. 

And, father, how can I love you 

Or any of my brothers more ? 
I love you like the little bird 

That picks up crumbs around the door." 

The Priest sat by and t heard the child ; 

In trembling zeal he seized his hair, 
He led him by his little coat, 

And all admired the priestly care. 

And standing on the altar high, 

" Lo, what a fiend is here ! " said he : 

" One who sets reason up for judge 
Of our most holy mystery." 

The weeping child could not be heard, 
The weeping parents wept in vain : 

They stripped him to his little shirt, 
And bound him in an iron chain, 

And burned him in a holy place 

Where many had been burned before ; 

The weeping parents wept in vain. 
Are such things done on Albion's shore ? 



A LITTLE GIRL LOST. 

CUILDBEN of the future age, 
Beading this indignant page, 
Enow that in a former time 
Love, sweet love, was thought a crime. 



A CRADLE SONG. 59 

In the age of gold, 

Free from winter's cold, 

Youth and maiden bright, 

To the holy light, 

Naked in the sunny beams delight. 

Once a youthful pair, 

Filled with softest care, 

Met in garden bright 

Where the holy light 

Had just removed the curtains of the night. 

Then, in rising day, 

On the grass they play ; 

Parents were afar, 

Strangers came not near, 

And the maiden soon forgot her fear. 

Tired with kisses sweet, 

They agree to meet 

When the silent sleep 

Waves o'er heaven's deep, 

And the weary tired wanderers weep. 

To her father whjte 

Came the maiden bright ; 

But his loving look, 

Like the holy book, 

All her tender limbs with terror shook. 

" Ona, pale and weak, 

To thy father speak ! 

Oh the trembling fear ! 

Oh the dismal care 

That shakes the blossoms of my hoary hair ! " 



A DIVINE IMAGE. 

CRUELTY has a human heart, 

And Jealousy a human face ; 
Terror the human form divine, 

And Secresy the human dress. 
The human dress is forged iron, 

The human form a fiery forge, 
The human face a furnace sealed, 

The human heart its hungry gorge. 



A CRADLE SONG. 

SLEEP, sleep, beauty bright, 
Dreaming in the joys of night ; 
Sleep, sleep ; in thy sleep 
Little sorrows sit and weep. 



l>0 SONGS OF EXPERIENCE. 

Sweet babe, in thy face 
Soft desires I can trace, 
Secret joys and secret smiles, 
Little pretty infant wiles. 

As thy softest limbs I feel, 
Smiles as of the morning steal 
O'er thy cheek, and o'er thy breast 
Where thy little heart doth rest. 

Oh the cunning wiles that creep 
In thy little heart asleep I 
When thy little heart doth wake, 
Then the dreadful light shall break. 



THE SCHOOLBOY. 

I LOVE to rise on a summer morn, 

When birds are singing on every tree ; 
The distant huntsman winds his horn, 

And the skylark sings with me : 

Oh what sweet company I 
But to go to school in a summer morn, 

Oh it drives all joy away ! 
Under a cruel eye outworn, 

The little ones spend the day 

In sighing and dismay. 
Ah then at tunes I drooping sit, 

And spend many an anxious hour ; 
Nor in my book can I take delight, 

Nor sit in learning's bower, 

Worn through with the dreary shower. 
How can the bird that is born for joy 

Sit in a cage and sing ? 
How can a child, when fears annoy, 

But droop his tender wing, 

And forget his youthful spring ? 
Oh father and mother, if buds are nipped, 

And blossoms blown away ; 
And if the tender plants are stripped 

Of their joy in the springing day, 

By sorrow and care's dismay, 

How shall the summer arise in joy, 
Or the summer fruits appear ? 

Or how shall we gather what griefs destroy, 
Or bless the mellowing year, 
When the blasts of winter appear ? 



THE VOICE OP THE ANCfENT BARD. 61 

TO TIRZAH. 

WHATE'ER is born of mortal birth 
Must be consumed with the earth, 
To rise from generation free : 
Then what have I to do with thee ? 
The sexes sprang from shame and pride, 
Blown in the morn, in evening died ; 
But mercy changed death into sleep ; 
The sexes rose to work and weep. 

Thou, mother of my mortal part, 
With cruelty didst mould my heart, 
And with false self-deceiving tears 
Didst bind my nostrils, eyes, and ears, 

Didst close my tongue in senseless clay, 
And me to mortal life betray. 
The death of Jesus set me free : 
Then what have I to do with thee ? 



THE VOICE OF THE ANCIENT BARD. 

YOUTH of delight ! come hither 

And see the opening morn, 

Image of Truth new-born. 

Doubt is fled, and clouds of reason, 

Dark disputes and artful teazing. 

Folly is an endless maze ; 

Tangled roots perplex her ways ; 

How many have fallen there ! 

They stumble all night over bones of the dead ; 

And feel they know not what but care ; 

And wish to lead others, when they should be led. 

END OF THE SONGS OF EXPERIENCE. 



THE GATES OF PARADISE. 

ENGRAVED 1793.) 



UN RODUCTION. 

MUTUAL forgiveness of each vice, 
Such are the Gates of Paradise, 
Against the Accuser's chief desire, 
Who walked among the stones of fire. 
Jehovah's fingers wrote the Law : 
He wept ; then rose in zeal and awe, 
And, in the midst of Sinai's heat, 
Hid it beneath his Mercy-Seat. 

O Christians ! Christians ! tell me why 
You rear it on your altars high ! 



THE KEYS OF THE GATES. 

THE caterpillar on the leaf 
Reminds thee of thy mother's grief. 
My Eternal Man set in repose, 
The Female from his darkness rose ; 
And she found me beneath a tree, 
A mandrake, and in her veil hid me. 
Serpent reasonings us entice 
Of good and evil, virtue, vice. 
Doubt self -jealous, watery folly, 
Struggling through Earth's melancholy. 
Naked in air, in shame and fear, 
Blind in fire, with shield and spear, 
Two horrid reasoning cloven fictions, 
In doubt which is self-contradiction, 
A dark hermaphrodite I stood,-^r 
Rational truth, root of evil ancrgood. 
Round me, flew the flaming sword ; 
Round her, snowy whirlwinds roared, 
Freezing her veil, the mundane shell. 
I rent the veil where the dead dwell : 
When weary man enters his cave, 
He meets his Saviour in the grave. 



THE GATES OF PARADISE. 63 

Some find a female garment there, 
And some a male, woven with care, 
Lest the sexual garments sweet 
Should grow a devouring winding-sheet. 
One dies ! alas ! the living and dead ! 
One is slain, and one is fled ! 
In vain-glory hatched and nursed, 
By double spectres, self-accursed. 
My son ! my son ! thou treatest me 
But as I have instructed thee. 
On the shadows of the moon, 
Climbing through night's highest noon : 
In Time's ocean falling, drowned : 
In aged ignorance profound, 
Holy and cold, I clipped the wings 
Of all sublunary things : 
And in depths of icy dungeons 
Closed the father and the sons. 
But, when once I did descry 
The Immortal Man that cannot die, 
Through evening shades I haste away 
To close the labours of my day. 
The door of Death I open found, 
And the worm weaving in the ground : 
Thou'rt my mother, from the womb ; 
Wife, sister, daughter, to the tomb : 
Weaving to dreams the sexual strife, 
And weeping over the web of life. 



EPILOGUE. 

TO THE ACCUSER, WHO IS THE GOD OF THIS WORLD. 

TRULY, my Satan, thou art but a dunce, 

And dost not know the garment from the man ; 
Every harlot was a virgin once, 

Nor canst thou ever change Kate into Nan. 
Though thou art worshipped by the names divine 

Of Jesus and Jehovah, thou art still 
The son of morn in weary night's decline, 

The lost traveller's dream under the hill. 



<U TO ME. BUTTS 

TO MY DEAR FRIEND, 

MRS. ANNA FL.AXMAN. 

(Sent by Blake in a letter from Mrs. Blake to Mrs. Flaxman, 
dated Lambeth, Sept. 14, 1800.) 

THIS song to the flower of Flaxman's joy ; 

To the blossom of hope, for a sweet decoy ; 

Do all that you can, or all that you may, 

To entice him to Felpham and far away. 
Away to sweet Felpham, for heaven is there ; 
The ladder of angels descends through the air ; 
On the turret its spiral does softly descend, 
Through the village then winds, at my cot it does end. 
You stand in the village and look up to heaven ; 
The precious stones glitter on flight seventy-seven ; 
And my brother is there ; and my friend and thine 
Descend and ascend with the bread and the wine. 
The bread of sweet thought and the wine of delight 
Feed the village of Felpham by day and by night ; 
And at his own door the bless'd Hermit does stand, 
Dispensing unceasing to all the wide land. 


TO MR. BUTTS. 

(From a letter dated FelpJiam, Oct. 2, 1800.) 
To my friend Butts I write 
My first vision of light, 
On the yellow sands sitting. 
The sun was emitting 
His glorious beams 
From heaven's high streams. 
Over sea, over land, 
My eyes did expand 
Into regions of air, 
Away from all care ; 
Into regions of fire, 
Remote from desire : 
The light of the morning 
Heaven's mountains adorning. 
In particles bright, 
The jewels of light 
Distinct shone and clear. 
Amazed and in fear 
I each particle gazed, 
Astonished, amazed ; 
For each was a man 
Human-formed. Swift I ran, 
For they beckoned to me, 
Remote by the sea, 
Saying: " Each grain of sand, 
Every stone on the land, 









TO MR. BUTTS. 65 

Each rock and each hill, 

Each fountain and rill, 

Each herb and each tree, 

Mountain, hill, earth, and sea, 

Cloud, meteor, and star, 

Are men seen afar." 

I stood in the streams 

Of heaven's bright beams, 

And saw Felpham sweet 

Beneath my bright feet, 

In soft female charms ; 

And in her fair arms 

My shadow I knew, 

And my wife's shadow too, 

And my sister and friend. 

We like infants descend 

In our shadows on earth, 

Like a weak mortal birth. 

My eyes more and more, 

Like a sea without shore, 

Continue expanding, 

The heavens commanding, 

Till the jewels of light, 
Heavenly men beaming bright, 
Appeared as one man, 

Who complacent began 
My limbs to infold 
In his beams of bright gold ; 
Like dross purged away 
All my mire and my clay. 
Soft consumed in delight, 
In his bosom sun-bright 
I remained. Soft he smiled, 
And I heard his voice mild, 
Saying : " This is my fold, 
thou ram horned with gold, 
Who awakest from sleep 
On the sides of the deep. 
On the mountains around 
The roarings resound 
Of the lion and wolf, 
The loud sea and deep gulph. 
These are guards of my fold, 

thou ram horned with gold ! " 
And the voice faded mild, 

1 remained as a child ; 
All I ever had known 
Before me bright shone : 
I saw you and your wife 
By the fountains of life. 
Such the vision to me 
Appeared on the sea. 

VOL. HI, K 



66 VERSES. 

TO MBS. BUTTS. 

(From the name letter.) 
WIFE of the friend of those I most revere, 
Receive this tribute from a harp sincere ; 
Go on in virtuous seed-sowing on mould 
Of human vegetation, and behold 
Your harvest springing to eternal life, 
Parent of youthful minds, and happy wife. 



VERSES. 
(From a letter to Mr. Butts dated Felpham, Nov. 22, 1802.) 

WITH happiness stretched across the hills 

In a cloud that dewy sweetness distils, 

With a blue sky spread over with wings, 

And a mild sun that mounts and sings ; 

With trees and fields full of fairy elves, 

And little devils who fight for themselves, 

Remembering the verses that Hayley sung 

When my heart knocked against the root of my tongue, 

With angels planted in hawthorn bowers, 

And God himself in the passing hours ; 

With silver angels across my way, 

And golden demons that none can stay ; 

With my father hovering upon the wind, 

And my brother Robert just behind, 

And my brother John, the evil one, 

In a black cloud making his moan ; 

(Though dead, they appear upon my path, 

Notwithstanding my terrible wrath ; 

They beg, they entreat, they drop their tears, 

Filled full of hopes, filled full of fears ;) 

With a thousand angels upon the wind, 

Pouring disconsolate from behind 

To drive them off, and before my way 

A frowning Thistle implores my stay. 

What to others a trifle appears 

Fills me full of smiles or tears ; 

For double the vision my eyes do see, 

And a double vision is always with me. 

With my inward eye, 'tis an old man grey ; 

With my outward, a thistle across my way. 

" If thou goest back," the Thistle said, 
" Thou art to endless woe betrayed ; 
For here does Theotormon lour, 
And here is Enitharmon's bower, 
And Los the terrible thus hath sworn, 
Because thou backward dost return, 
Poverty, envy, old age, and fear, 



VERSES. f7 

Shall bring thy wife upon a bier ; 
And Butts shall give what Fuseli gave, 
A dark black rock and a gloomy cave." 
I struck the thistle with my foot, 
And broke him up from his delving root. 
" Must the duties of life each other cross ? 
Must every joy be dung and dross ? 
Must my dear Butts feel cold neglect 
Because I give Hayley his due respect ? 
Must Flaxman look upon me as wild, 
And all my friends be with doubts beguiled ? 
Must my wife live in my sister's bane, 
Or my sister survive on my Love's pain ? 
The curses of Los, the terrible shade, 
And his dismal terrors, make me afraid." 

So I spoke, and struck in my wrath 
The old man weltering upon my path. 
Then Los appeared in all his power : 
In the sun he appeared, descending before 
My face in fierce flames ; in my double sight, 
'Twas outward a sun, inward, Los in his might. 
" My hands are laboured day and night, 
And ease comes never in my sight. 
My wife has no indulgence given, 
Except what comes to her from heaven. 
We eat little, we drink less ; 
This earth breeds not our happiness. 
Another sun feeds our life's streams ; 
We are not warmed with thy beams. 
Thou measurest not the time to me, 
Nor yet the space that I do see : 
My mind is not with thy light arrayed ; 
Thy terrors shall not make me afraid." 

When I had my defiance given, 
The sun stood trembling in heaven ; 
The moon, that glowed remote below, 
Became leprous and white as snow ; 
And every soul of man on the earth 
Felt affliction and sorrow and sickness and dearth. 
Los flamed in my path, and the sun was hot 
With the bows of my mind and the arrows of thought : 
My bowstring fierce with ardour breathes, 
My arrows glow in their golden sheaves. 
My brother and father march before ; 
The heavens drop with human gore. 

Now I a fourfold vision see, 
And a fourfold vision is given to me ; 
VOL. III. . r > 



68 THE TWO SONGS. 

Tis fourfold in my supreme delight, 
And threefold in soft Beulah's night, 
And twofold always. May God us keep 
From single vision, and Newton's sleep ! 



(At printed in the Aldine Edition of Blake's Poems.) 
THE BIRDS. 



WHERE thoti dwellest, in what grove, 
Tell me, fair one, tell me, love ; 
Where thou thy charming nest doth build, 
thou pride of every field ! 

SHE. 

Yonder stands a lonely tree : 
There I live and mourn for thee. 
Morning drinks my silent tear, 
And evening winds my sorrow bear. 



thou summer's harmony, 

1 have lived and mourned for thee ; 
Each day I moan along the wood, 
And night hath heard my sorrows loud. 

SHE. 

Dost thou truly long for me ? 
And am I thus sweet to thee ? 
Sorrow now is at an end, 
my lover and my friend ! 

HE. 

Come ! on wings of joy we'll fly 
To where my bower is hung on high ; 
Come, and make thy calm retreat 
Among green leaves and blossoms sweet. 



THE TWO SONGS. 
I HEARD an Angel singing 
When the day was springing : 
" Mercy, pity, and peace, 
Are the world's release." 
So he sang all day 
Over the new-mown hay, 
Till the sun went down, 
And haycocks looked brown. 



CUPID. 69 



I heard a Devil curse 

Over the heath and the f urse : 

" Mercy could be no more 

If there were nobody poor, 

And pity no more could be 

If all were happy as ye : 

And mutual fear brings peace. 

Misery's increase 

Are mercy, pity, peace." 

At his curse the sun went down, 
And the heavens gave a frown. 



THE DEFILED SANCTUARY. 

I SAW a chapel all of gold 

That none did dare to enter in, 

And many weeping stood without, 
Weeping, mourning, worshipping, 

I saw a serpent rise between 
The white pillars of the door, 

And he forced and forced and forced 
Till he the golden hinges tore : 

And along the pavement sweet, 
Set with pearls and rubies bright, 

All his shining length he drew, 
Till upon the altar white 

He vomited his poison out 
On the bread and on the wine. 

So I turned into a sty, 
And laid me down among the swine. 



CUPID. 

WHY was Cupid a boy, 
And why a boy was he ? 

He should have been a girl, 
For aught that I can see. 

For he shoots with his bow, 

And the girl shoots with her eye 

And they both are merry and glad 
And laugh when we do cry. 



to 



SCOFFERS. 

Then to make Cupid a boy 
Was surely a woman's plau, 

For a boy never learns so much 
Till he has become a man : 

And then he's so pierced with cares, 
And wounded with arrowy smarts, 

That the whole business of his life 
Is to pick out the heads of the darts. 



LOVE'S SECRET. 

NEVER seek to tell thy love, 

Love that never told can be ; 
For the gentle wind doth move 
Silently, invisibly. 

I told my love, I told my love, 

I told her all my heart, 
Trembling, cold, in ghastly fears. 

Ah ! she did depart ! 

Soon after she was gone from me, 

A traveller came by, 
Silently, invisibly : 

He took her with a sigh. 



THE WILD FLOWER'S SONG. 

As I wandered in the forest 
The green leaves among, 

I heard a wild-flower 
Singing a song. 

" I slept in the earth 

In the silent night ; 
I murmured my thoughts, 

And I felt delight. 

" In the morning I went, 

As rosy as morn, 
To seek for new joy, 

But I met with scorn." 



SCOFFERS. 

MOCK on, mock on, Voltaire, Rousseau, 
Mock on, mock on ; 'tis all in vain ; 

You throw the sand against the wind, 
And the wind blows it back again. 



YOUNG LOVE. 71 

And every sand becomes a gem, 

Reflected in the beams divine ; 
Blown back, they blind the mocking eye, 

But still in Israel's paths they shine. 

The atoms of Democritus 

And Newton's particles of light 
Are sands upon the Bed Sea shore 

Where Israel's tents do shine so bright. 



DAYBREAK. 

To find the western path, 

Eight through the gates of wrath 

I urge my way ; 
Sweet morning leads me on ; 
With soft repentant moan 

I see the break of day. 

The war of swords and spears, 
Melted by dewy tears, 

Exhales on high ; 
The sun is freed from fears, 
And with soft grateful tears 

Ascends the sky. 



THAMES AND OHIO. 

WHY should I care for the men of Thames, 
And the cheating waters of chartered streams, 
Or shrink at the little blasts of fear 
That the hireling blows into mine ear ? 

Though born on the cheating banks of Thames- 
Though his waters bathed my infant limbs 
The Ohio shall wash his stains from me ; 
I was born a slave, but I go to be free. 



YOUNG LOVE. 

ABE not the joys of morning sweeter 

Than the joys of night ? 
And are the vigorous joys of youth 

Ashamed of the light ? 

Let age and sickness silent rob 

The vineyard in the night ; 
But those who burn with vigorous youth 

Pluck fruits before the light. 



72 OPPORTUNHV. 

THE GOLDEN NET. 

BENEATH a white-thorn's lovely may 

Three virgins at the break of day. 

" Whither, young man, whither away 

Alas for woe ! alas for woe ! " 

They cry, and tears for ever flow. 

The first was clothed in flames of fire, 

The second clothed in iron wire ; 

The third was clothed in tears and sighs 

Dazzling bright before my eyes. 

They bore a net of golden twine 

To hang upon the branches fine. 

Pitying I wept to see the woe 

That love and beauty undergo 

To be clothed in burning fires 

And n ungratified desires, 

And in tears clothed night and day ; 

It melted all my soul away. 

When they saw my tears, a smile 

That might heaven itself beguile 

Bore the golden net aloft, 

As on downy pinions soft, 

Over the morning of my day. 

Underneath the net I stray, 

Now entreating Flaming-fire 

Now entreating Iron-wire, 

Now entreating Tears-and-sighs. 

Oh when will the morning rise ? 



RICHES. 

SINCE all the riches of this world 

May be gifts from the devil and earthly kings, 
I should suspect that I worshipped the devil 

If I thanked my God for worldly things. 

The countless gold of a merry heart, 
The rubies and pearls of a loving eye, 

The idle man never can bring to the mart, 
Nor the cunning hoard up in his treasury. 



OPPORTUNITY. 

HE who bends to himself a joy 
Does the winged life destroy ; 
But he who kisses the joy as it flies 
Lives in eternity's sunrise. 



iNIGHT AND DAY. 73 

If you trap the moment before it's ripe, 
The tears of repentance you'll certainly wipe ; 
But, if once you let the ripe moment go, 
You can never wipe off the tears of woe. 



SEED-SOWING. 

" Tnou hast a lapful of seed," 
And this is a fair country. 
Why dost thou not cast thy seed, 
And live in it merrily ? " 

" Shall I cast it on the sand, 

And turn it into fruitful land ? 

For on no other ground can I sow my seed 

Without tearing up some stinking weed." 



BARREN BLOSSOM. 

I FEAKED the fury of my wind 

Would blight all blossoms fair and true, 
And my sun it shined and shined, 

And my wind it never blew. 

But a blossom fair or true 

Was not found on any tree ; 
For all blossoms grew and grew 

Fruitless, false, though fair to see. 



NIGHT AND DAY. 

SILENT, silent Night, 
Quench the holy light 
Of thy torches bright ; 

For, possessed of Day, 
Thousand spirits stray 
That sweet joys betray. 

Why should joys be sweet 

Used with deceit, 

Nor with sorrows meet ? 

But an honest joy 
Doth itself destroy 
For a harlot coy. 



74 FOB A PICTURE OF THE LAST JUDGMENT. 

IN A MYRTLE SHADE. 

To a lovely myrtle bound, 
Blossoms showering all around, 
Oh how weak and weary I 
Underneath my myrtle lie ! 

Why should I be bound to thee, 
my lovely myrtle-tree ? 
Love, free love, cannot be bound 
To any tree that grows on ground. 



IDOLATRY. 

IF it is true, what the Prophets write, 

That the Heathen Gods are all stocks and stones, 
Shall we, for the sake of being polite, 

Feed them with the juice of our marrow bones ? 

And, if Be/.alcol and Aholiab drew 
What the finger of God pointed to their view, 
Shall we suffer the Roman and Grecian rods 
To compel us to worship them as Gods ? 

They stole them from 

The Temple of the Lord, 
And worshipped them that they might make 

Inspired art abhorred. 

The wood and stone were called the holy things, 
And their sublime intent given to their kings ; 
All the atonements of Jehovah spurned, 
And criminals to sacrifices turned. 



FOR A PICTURE OF THE LAST JUDGMENT. 
DEDICATION. 

THE caverns of the Grave I've seen, 
And these I showed to England's Queen 
But now the caves of Hell I view, 
Whom shall I dare to show them to ? 
What mighty soul in beauty's form 
Shall dauntless view the infernal storm ? 
Egremont's Countess can control 
The flames of hell that round me roll. 
If she refuse, I still go on, 
Till the heavens and earth are gone ; 
Still admired by noble minds, 
Followed by Envy on the winds. 



SMILE AND FROWN. 75 

Re-engraved time after time, 
Ever in their youthful prime, 
My designs unchanged remain ; 
Time may rage, but rage in vain ; 
For above Time's troubled fountains, 
On the great Atlantic mountains, 
In my golden house on high, 
There they shine eternally. 



THE WILL AND THE WAY. 

I ASKED a thief to steal me a peach : 

He turned up his eyes. 
I asked a lithe lady to lie her down : 

Holy and meek, she cries. 

As soon as I went, 

An Angel came. 
He winked at the thief, 

And smiled at the dame ; 

And, without one word spoke, 
Had a peach from the tree, 

And 'twixt earnest and joke 
Enjoyed the lady. 



SMILE AND FROWN. 

THERE is a smile of Love, 
And there is a smile of Deceit, 

And there is a smile of smiles 
In which these two smiles meet. 

And there is a frown of Hate, 
And there is a frown of Disdain, 

And there is a frown of frowns 
Which you strive to forget in vain, 

For it sticks in the heart's deep core 
And it sticks in the deep backbone. 

And no smile ever was smiled 
But only one smile alone. 

(And betwixt the cradle and grave 
It only once smiled can be) 

That when it once is smiled 
There's an end to all misery. 



76 AUGURIES OF INNOCENCE. 

THE LAND OF DREAMS. 

AWAKE, awoke, my little boy ! 
Thou wast thy mother's only joy. 
Why dost thou weep in thy gentle sleep ? 
Oh wake ! thy father doth thee keep. 

" Oh what land is the land of dreams ? 

What are its mountains and what are its streams ? 

"Oh father 1 I saw my mother there, 

Among the lilies by waters fair. 

" Among the lambs clothed in white, 
She walked with her Thomas in sweet delight. 
I wept for joy, like a dove I mourn- 
On when shall I again return ? " 

" Dear child ! I also by pleasant streams 
Have wandered all night in the land of dreams 
But, though calm and warm the waters wide, 
I could not get to the other side." 

" Father, O father 1 what do we here, 
In this laud of unbelief and fear? 
The laud of dreams is butter far, 
Above the light of the morning star." 






AUGURIES OF INNOCENCE 

TO see a world in a grain of sand, 
And a heaven in a wild flower ; 

Hold infinity in the palm of your liand, 
And eternity in an hour. 

A Robin Eedbreast in a cage 

Puts all Heaven in a rage ; 

A dove-house filled with doves and pigeons 

Shudders hell through all its regions. 

A dog starved at his master's gate 

Predicts the ruin of the state ; 

A game-cock clipped and armed for fight 

Doth the rising sun affright ; 

A horse misused upon the road 

Calls to Heaven for human blood. 

Every wolf's and lion's howl 

Raises from hell a human soul ; 

Each outcry of the hunted hare 

A fibre from the brain doth tear ; 

A skylark wounded on the wing 

Doth make a cherub cease to sing. 



AUGURIES OF INNOCENCE. 77 

He who shall hurt the little wren 

Shall never be beloved by men ; 

He who the ox to wrath has moved 

Shall never be by woman loved ; 

He who shall train the horse to war 

Shall never pass the Polar Bar. 

The wanton boy that kills the fly 

Shall feel the spider's enmity ; 

He who torments the chafer's sprite 

Weaves a bovver in endless night. 

The caterpillar on the leaf 

Eepeats to thee thy mother's grief ; 

The wild deer wandering here and there 

Keep the human soul from care : 

The lamb misused breeds public strife, 

And yet forgives the butcher's knife. 

Kill not the moth nor butterfly, 

For the last judgment draweth nigh ; 

The beggar's dog and widow's cat, 

Feed them and thou shalt grow fat. 

Every tear from every eye 

Becomes a babe in eternity ; 

The bleat, the bark, bellow, and roar, 

Are waves that beat on heaven's shore. 

The bat that flits at close of eve 

Has left the brain that won't believe ; 

The owl that calls upon the night 

Speaks the unbeliever's fright. 

The gnat that sings his summer's song 

Poison gets from Slander's tongue ; 

The poison of the snake and newt 

Is the sweat of Envy's foot ; 

The poison of the honey-bee 

Is the artist's jealousy ; 

The strongest poison ever known 

Carne from Caesar's laurel-crown. 

Nought can deform the human race 
Like to the armourer's iron brace ; 
The soldier armed with sword and gun 
Palsied strikes the summer's sun. 
When gold and gems adorn the plough, 
To peaceful hearts shall Envy bow. 
The beggar's rags fluttering in air 
Do to rags the heavens tear ; 
The prince's robes and beggar's rags 
Are toadstools on the miser's bags. 



78 AUGURIES OF INNOCENCE. 

One mite wrong from the labourer's hands 
Shall buy and sell the miser's land?, 
Or, if protected from on high, 
Shall that whole nation sell and buy ; 
The poor man's farthing is worth more 
Than all the gold on Afric's shore. 
The whore and gambler, by the state 
Licensed, build that nation's fate ; 
The harlot's cry from street to street 
Shall weave old England's winding-sheet ; 
The winner's shout, the loser's curse, 
Shall dance before dead England's hearse 

He who mocks the infant's faith 

Shall be mocked in age and death ; 

He who shall teach the child to doubt 

The rotting grave shall ne'er get out ; 

He who respects the infant's faith 

Triumphs over hell and death. 

The babe is more than swaddling-bands 

Throughout all these human lands ; 

Tools were made, and born were hands, 

Every farmer understands. 

The questioner who sits so sly 

Shall never know how to reply. 

He who replies to words of doubt 

Doth put the light of knowledge out ; 

A puddle, or the cricket's cry, 

Is to doubt a fit reply. 

The child's toys and the old man's reasons 

Are the fruits of the two seasons. 

The emmet's inch and eagle's mile 

Make lame philosophy to smile. 

A truth that's told with bad intent 

Beats all the lies you can invent. 

He who doubts from what he sees 

Will ne'er believe, do what you please ; 

If the sun and moon should doubt, 

They'd immediately go out. 

Every night and every morn 
Some to misery are born ; 
Every morn and every night 
Some are born to sweet delight ; 
Some are born to sweet delight, 
Some are born to endless night. 
Joy and woe arc woven fine, 
A clothing for the soul divine ; 
Under every grief and pine 
Puns a joy with silken twine. 



WILLIAM BOND. 70 

It is right it should be so ; 
Man was made for joy and woe ; 
And, when this we rightly know, 
Safely through the world we go. 

We are led to believe a lie 

When we see with not through the eye, 

Which was born in a night to perish in a night 

When the soul slept in beams of light. 

God appears and God is light 

To those poor souls who dwell in night ; 

But doth a human form display 

To those who dwell in realms of day. 



WILLIAM BOND. 

I WONDER whether the girls are mad, 

And I wonder whether they mean to kill, 

And I wonder if William Bond will die, 
For assuredly he is very ill. 

He went to church on a May morning, 
Attended by fairies, one, two, and three ; 

But the angels of Providence drove them away, 
And he returned home in misery. 

He went not out to the field nor fold, 
He went not out to the village nor town, 

But he came home in a black black cloud, 
And took to his bed, and there lay down. 

And an angel of Providence at his feet, 
And an angel of Providence at his head, 

And in the midst a black black cloud, 
And in the midst the sick man on his bed. 

And on his right hand was Mary Green, 
Aiid on his left hand was his sister Jane, 

And their tears fell through the black black cloud 
To drive away the sick man's pain. 

" Oh William, if thou dost another love, 
Dost another love better than poor Mary, 

Go and take that other to be thy wife, 
And Mary Green shall her servant be." 

" Yes, Mary, I do another love, 

Another I love far better than thee, 

And another I will have for my wife : 
Then what have I to do with thee ? 



80 SONG BY AN OLD SHEPHERD. 

" For them art melancholy pale, 

And on thy head is the cold moon's shine, 

But she is ruddy and bright as day, 
And the sunbeams dazzle from her eyne." 

Mary trembled, and Mary chilled, 

And Mary fell down on the right-hand floor, 

That William Bond and his sister Jane 
Scarce could recover Mary more. 

When Mary woke and found her laid 
On the right hind of her William dear, 

On the right hand of his loved bed, 
And saw her William Bond so near ; 

The fairies that fled from William Bond 
Danced around her shining head ; 

They danced over the pillow white, 
And the angels of Providence left the bed. 

" I thought love lived in the hot sunshine, 
But oh he lives in the moony light ! 

I thought to find Love in the heat of day, 
But sweet Love is the comforter of night. 

" Seek Love in the pity of others' woe, 
In the gentle relief of another's care. 

In the darkness of night and the winter's snow, 
With the naked and outcast, seek Love there." 



SONG BY A SHEPHERD. 

WELCOME little stranger to this place, 
Where joy doth sit on every bough, 

Paleness flies from every face, 
We reap not what we do not sow. 

Innocence doth, like a rose, 
Bloom on every maiden'a cheek. 

Honour twines around her brows, 
The jewel health adorns her neck. 



SONG BY AN OLD SHEPHERD. 

WHEN silver snow decks Silvia's clothes, 

And jewel hangs at shepherd's nose, 

We can abide life's pelting storm, 

That makes our limbs quake if our hearts be warm. 






MARY. 81 

Whilst Virtue is our walking staff 

And Truth a lantern to our path, 

We can abide life's pelting storm, 

Which makes our limbs quake if our hearts be warm. 

Blow boist'rous wind, stern winter frown, 

Innocence is a winter's gown. 

So clad, we'll abide life's pelting storm, 

That makes our limbs quake if our hearts be warm. 



LONG JOHN BROWN AND LITTLE MARY BELL. 

LITTLE Mary Bell had a fairy in a nut, 
Long John Brown had the devil in his gut, 
Long John Brown loved little Mary Bell, 
And the fairy drew the devil into the nutshell. 

Her fairy skipp'd out, her fairy skipp'd in, 
He laughed at the devil, saying " Love is a sin." 
The devil he raged and the devil he was wroth, 
And the devil entered into the young man's broth. 

He was soon in the gut of the loving young swain, 

For John eat and drank to drive away love's pain, 

But all he could do he grew thinner and thinner, 

Though he eat and drank aa much as ten men for his dinner. 

Some said he had a wolf in his stomach day and night. 
Some said he had the devil, and they guessed right, 
The fairy skipped about in his glory, love and pride, 
And he laughed at the devil till poor John Brown died. 

Then the fairy skipp'd out of the old nutshell, 
And woe and alack for pretty Mary Bell, 
For the devil crept in when the fairy skipp'd out, 
And there goes Miss Bell with her fusty old nut. 



MARY. 

SWEET Mary, the first time she ever was there, 
Came into the ball-room among the fair ; 
The young men and maidens around her throng, 
And these are the words upon every tongue : 

" An angel is here from the heavenly climes, 
Or again return the golden times ; 
Her eyes outshine every brilliant ray, 
She opens her lips 'tis the month of May." 

Mary moves in soft beauty and conscious delight, 
To augment with sweet smiles all the joys of the night, 
Nor once blushes to own to the rest of the fair 
That sweet love and beauty are worthy our care. 
VOL. III. 



THE CRYSTAL CABINET. 

In the morning the villagers rose with delight, 

And repeated with pleasure the joys of the night, 

And Mary arose among friends to bo free, 

But no friend from henceforward thou, Mary, shalt see. 

Some said she was proud, some called her a whore, 
And some when she passed by shut-to the door ; 
A damp cold came o'er her, her blushes all fled, 
Her lilies and roses are blighted and shed. 

" Oh why was I born with a different face? 
Why was I not born like this envious race ? 
Why did Heaven adorn me with bountiful hand, 
And then set me down in an envious land ? 

" To bo weak as a lamb and smooth as a dove, 
And not to raise envy, is called Christian love ; 
But, if you raise envy, your merit's to blame 
For planting such spite in the weak and the tame. 

' I will humble my beauty, I will not dress fine, 

I will keep from the ball, and my eyes shall not shine ; 

And, if any girl's lover forsake her for me, 

I'll refuse him my hand, and from envy be free." 

She went out in the morning attired plain and neat ; 
" Proud Mary's gone mad," said the child in the street 
She went out in the morning in plain neat attire, 
And came home in the evening bespattered with mire. 

She trembled and wept, sitting on the bedside, 
She forgot it was night, and she trembled and cried ; 
She forgot it was night, she forgot it was morn, 
Her soft memory imprinted with faces of scorn ; 

With faces of scorn and with eyes of disdain, 
Like foul fiends inhabiting Mary's mild brain ; 
She remembers no face like the human divine ; 
All faces have envy, sweet Mary, but thine. 

And thine is a face of sweet love in despair, 
And thine is a face of mild sorrow and care, 
And thine is a face of wild terror and fear 
That shall never be quiet till laid on its bier. 



THE CRYSTAL CABINET. 

THE maiden caught mo in the wild, 
Where I was dancing merrily ; 

She put mo into her cabinet, 
And locked mo up with a golden key. 



THE CRYSTAL CABINET. 83 

This cabinet is formed of gold, 

And pearl and crystal shining bright, 
And within it opens into a world 

And a little lovely moony night. 

Another England there I saw, 

Another London with its Tower, 
Another Thames and other hills, 

And another pleasant Surrey bower. 

Another maiden like herself, 

Translucent, lovely, shining clear, 
Threefold, each in the other closed, 

Oh what a pleasant trembling fear 

Oh what a smile ! A threefold smile 

Pilled me that like a flame I burned 
I bent to kiss the lovely maid, 

And found a threefold kiss returned. 

I strove to seize the inmost form 

With ardour fierce and hands of flame, 
But burst the crystal cabinet, 

And like a weeping babe became : 

A weeping babe upon the wild, 

And weeping woman pale reclined, 
And in the outward air again 

I filled with woes the passing wind. 



VOL, III. 



COUPLETS AND FRAGMENTS. 

(Not printed now for the first time.) 
SEE Vor.. I., P. 202, THE MS. BOOK. 



I WALKED abroad on a snowy day, 
I asked the soft Snow with me to play ; 
She played and she melted in all her prime ; 
And the Winter called it a dreadful crime. 



ABSTINENCE sows sand all over 

The ruddy limbs and flaming hair ; 

But desire gratified 
Plants fruits of life and beauty there. 



THE look of love alarms, 

Because 'tis filled with fire, 
But the look of soft deceit 

Shall win the lover's hire : 
Soft deceit and idleness, 
These are beauty's sweetest dress. 

rv. 

To Chloe's breast young Cupid slily stole, 
But he crept in at Myra's pocket-hole. 

v. 

GnowN old in love from seven till seven times seven, 
I oft have wished for hell, for ease from heaven. 



TnE Sword sang on the barren heath, 
The Sickle in the fruitful field : 

The Sword he sang a song of death, 
But could not make the Sickle yield. 



GREAT things are done when men and mountains meet 
These are not done by jostling in the street. 



THE errors of a wise man make your rule, 
Rather than the perfections of a fool. 



COUPLETS AND FRAGMENTS. 8i> 



IX. 



SOME people admire the work of a fool, 
For it's sure to keep your judgment cool : 
It does not reproach you with want of wit ; 
It is not like a lawyer serving a writ. 



HE'S a blockhead who wants a proof of what he can't perceive, 
And he's a fool who tries to make such a blockhead believe. 



XI. 

IF e'er I grow to man's estate, 
Oh give to me a woman's fate 1 
May I govern all, both great and small, 
Have the last word, and take the wall I 



HER whole life is an epigram smack, smooth, and nobly penned, 
Plaited quite neat to catch applause, with a strong noose at the end. 



ANGER and wrath my bosom rends, 
I thought them the errors of friends ; 
But all my limbs with warmth do glow, 
I find them the errors of the foe. 

XIV. 

TO F . 

I MOCK thee not, though I by thee am mocked, 
Thou call'st me madman, but I call thee blockhead. 



xv. 

HERE lies John Trot, the friend of all mankind, 
He has not left one enemy behind : 
Friends were quite hard to find, old authors say, 
But now they stand in everybody's way. 

XVI. 

No real style of colouring now appears, 
But advertising in the Newspapers, 
Look here, you'll see Sir Joshua's colouring ; 
Look at his pictures : all has taken wing. 



86 



COUrLETS AND FRAGMENTS. 



You don't believe : I won't attempt to make ye. 
You are asleep ; I won't attempt to wake ye. 
Sleep on, sleep on, while in your pleasant dreama 
Of Reason, you may drink of Life's clear streams, 
Reason and Newton : they are quite two things, 
For BO the swallow, and the sparrow sings. 

Reason says " Miracle 1 " Newton says " Doubt, 
" Aye, that's the way to moke all nature out. 
Doubt, doubt, and don't believe without experiment ; 
That is the very thing that Jesus meant, 
When ho said, ' Only believe : believe and try ; 
Try, try, and never mind the reason why.' " 

XIX. 

You must agree that Rubens was a fool, 
And yet you make him master of your school 
And give more money for his slobberings 
Than you will give for Rafael's finest thing. 

xx. 

WHEN I see a Rembrandt or Corrcggio, 

I think of crippled Harry, or slobbering Joe. 

And then I say to myself, are artist's rules 

To be drawn from the works of two manifest fools '/ 

Then God defend us from the arts, I say, 

Send battle, murder, sudden death, wo pray 

Rather than bo such a human fool 

I'd be a hog, a worm, a choir, a stool. 



XXI. 

I ASKED my dear friend, Orator Prig, 

" What's the first thing in oratory ? " he said : " A great Wig." 

" And what is the second ?" Then dancing a jig 

And bowing profoundly, he said: " A great Wig." 

" And what is the third ? " Then ho snored like a pig, 

And thrust out his cheeks, and replied : "A great Wig." 

So, if to a painter the question you push, 

" What's the first part of painting ? " he'd say, " A paint bruah," 

" And what is the second ? " with most modest blush 

He'll smile like a cherub, and say, " A paint brush." 

" And what is the third ? " He will bow like a rush, 

With a leer in his eye, and reply, " A point brush." 

Perhaps this is all that a painter can want, 

Jint look yonder ; that house is the house of Rembrandt. 



COUPLETS AND FRAGMENTS. 87 

XXII. 

DEAR mother Outline, of wisdom most sage, 

" What's the first part of painting ? " She said, " Patronage." 

" And what is the second, to please and engage ? " 

She frowned like a fury, and said, " Patronage." 

" And what is the third ? " She put off old age, 

And smiled like a Syren, and said, " Patronage." 



THAT God is colouring Newton does show, 
And the devil is a black outline all of us know. 



TO VENETIAN ABTISTS. 
PERHAPS this little fable may make us merry. 
A dog went over the water without a wherry. 
A bone which he had stolen he had in his mouth. 
He cared not whether the wind was north or south 
As he swam he saw the reflection of the bone. 
This is quite perfection generalizing tone ! 
Snap! snap 1 and lost the substance and shadow too. 
He had both these before. Now how d'ye do ? 
Those who have tasted colouring, love it more and more. 



88 



NOTES TO THE POETICAL SKETCHES, 
SONGS, &c. 

SELECTIONS from those wore printed in Gilchrist's " Life," and a text was made 
for them by Dante Gabriel Rossetti which has been generally recognized as a 
real service to literature and by no means a forced or unfair treatment of Blake. 

The Aldino Edition, however, restored most of the original errors. Perhaps 
it was well that this should be done once, though a scries of notes to the 
changes would have served the biographical purpose and yet left an enjoyable 
page to the reader. 

When the present work was schemed, there was no intention to print more 
of Blake's own writings than what called aloud for interpretation, and had 
called, up to the date of this edition, in vain. 

The only exceptions to the rule were made in favour of two fine pieces, the 
Samson, and the prologue to King John, which stood as much in need of 
correction, as the prophetic books did of interpretation. When, however, it 
became evident that new material and necessary reference to old errors, whether 
of text or biography, had so swollen the book that it could no longer be bound 
in two volumes, a division into three, and the addition of the present reprint 
of the Sketches, Songs, and other fragments, was decided upon after all the rest 
of the work was in type. 

Among the most beautiful of the " Poetical Sketches " aic the fragments of 
the play called " King Edward the Third." Portions of these, unnecessarily 
re-broken, have long been known in Gilchrist's " Life." The rest may be read in 
the Aldine, and in Mr. Quaritch's facsimile reprint of the original edition. In the 
text here given most of Dante Gabriel Bossetti's emendations as used by Gilchrist 
are adopted, and his system has been extended to the rest of the book, as to 
" Vala." Unlike " Vala," however, the original and imperfect text is already 
widely known and easily accessible. It is not necessary here, for conscienc 
sake, to give it, as in the notes to "Vala," with an exact description of every 
alteration made. It will be enough to name the lines which have been restored 
to metre from the wonderfully careless and self-confuting form in which they 
were left by the hasty hand that created, but would not control them. 

They are the following. The lines are counted from the first of each speech. 
Many are left with evident errors in them only because the correction is nc 
obviously suggested by the errors, and re-writing would be required to 
the lines conform to what should have bee a their own law. Others have 
dramatic value from their irregularity. These also are left untouched. 

Words like England, singly, &c., which count as three syllables, have been 
left with that value. It is truly theirs when spoken slowly, though grammar 
pretends not to know this. 

Compare Shakespeare, Troilus and Crcssida, Act III., Sc. III., 1. 2C 
crad-1-es (three syllables). 

Does thoughts unveil in their dumb cradles, and Shelley, tremb-l-ing-1 
(four syllables). 

Below far lands one seen tremblingly. 

OH the Mediisa of Leonardo da Vinci. 



NOTES TO THE POETICAL SKETCHES, SONGS, &C. 



89 



SCENE I. 

King's speech, lines 2, 4, 6, 7, 11, 13, 
20, 21, 23, 29, 45, 47. 

SCENE II. 
Clarence's first speech, lines 13, 14, 17; 

second speech, lines 2, 4, 5, 8, 9. 
Bishop, first speech, lines 1,3; third 

speech, lines 2, 3, 5, 12. 
Percy, line 7. 

SCENE III. 

Lord Audley, first speech, lines 3, 4. 

Dagworth, ninth speech, line 4 ; tenth 
speech, lines 1, 2 ; thirteenth 
speech, line 5 ; fifteenth speech, 
lines 6, 7 ; sixteenth speech, lines 
4,5. 

King, first speech, lines 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9 ; 



fourth speech, line 3 ; seventh 

speech, line 3. 
Black Prince, first speech, lines 4, 6 ; 

third speech, line 4. 
Chandos, fifth speech, lines 2, 6, 7, 8 ; 

sixth speech, lines 5, 8 ; seventh 

speech, lines 1, 9. 

SCENE V. 

Sir Walter Manny, first speech, line 
1 ; second speech, lines 3, 6, 8, 9, 
10, 11, 14, 16, 17. 

Sir Thomas Dagworth, third speech, 
lines 5, 9. 

SCENE, VI. 

Bard's Song, lines 13, 18, 19, 20, 34, 
35, 49, 50, 54, 55. 56, 57. 



Prologue to King Edward the Fourth, lines 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Prologue to King 
John. This was printed as prose. It is divided into lines in the Aldine Edition 
as given here, and re-divided differently, with slight verbal alterations in the 
text to be found above in Vol. I., pago 177. " Samson," similarly treated, will be 
found on page 179. 

To Spring, lines 5, 6. 

To Autumn, line 18. 

To Winter, lines 14, 15, 16. 

To the Evening star, lines 3, 6, 7, 12, 14. 

Every line not included in the above list is reprinted exactly as it was left 
by Blake. 

In the close of the Prince's great speech to Chandos, in the re-touched text of 
Gilchrist, Dante Bossetti had only added one word, tJien, after come, in the line 
which before stood thus, 

" Ambition, come, take the helm, my Chandos " 

in order that the word Ambition should not be stretched on the rack of four 
syllables. The Aldine edition wanders. Here is the original, which the present 
edition gives untouched. 

" My blood like a spring-tide 
Does rise so high to overflow all bounds 
Of moderation, while Reason in her 
Frail bark can see no shore or bound for vast 
Ambition. Come, take the helm my Chandos, 
That my full-blown sails overset me not 
In the wild tempest." 



Everything here depends on the reader. If he but know how to sound them, 



90 NOTES TO THE POETICAL SKETCHES, BONOS, &C. 

thoso linos form the fitting preparation for tho close of a speech which is one 
strong, swift broad-winged flight throughout. Tho Aldinc limes its feathers thus, 
and brings it down to an ill-measured flapping. 

" My blood like a spring-tide 
Does rise so high to overflow all bounds 
Of moderation; while Reason in her frail bark, 
Can see no shore or bound for vast ambition. 
Como, take tho helm, my Chandos, 
That my full-blown soils overset mo not 
In tho wild tempest." 

We unwillingly differ from Dante Gabriel Bossetti in his correction of tho lines 
from tho reply of Chandos, 

" Age is contemplative ; each rolling year 

Brings forth fruit to the mind's treasure house. 

Tho omission of the word her, after brings forth, seems to have been a mere 
slip of tho pen. Its addition completes the feminine figure of speech implied in 
tho words " bring forth." The line now, 

" Brings forth her fruit to the mind's treasure house " 
has tho natural Blake an roll, while to read 

" Doth bring forth fruit to the mind's treasure house," 

is to give the forward movement of the verse a sudden check, while the Bound 
merely marks time. 

His alteration of the incomplete line at tho end 

" with distaste, and dislike " 

into " As worthless " 

is so unhappy, and unnecessary, that though an ill-advised objection to the 
emphatic and powerful repetition of tho syllable dis may account for it, this can 
hardly be looked on as sufficient justification. 

The line from the Prince's last speech in this scene, 

" Shall mount on native wings, disdaining little sport," 

is something more than an accident. It is a foreshadowing of Blake's later 
style in using a longer line, and although not in place where it stands is too good 
in itself to lose. Readers disliking it will skip the word " native " without an 
effort, following Dante Gabriel Rossetti's text. 

In result, a careful study of this fragment of a play will leave no one doubtful 
that here is a school of blank verse more poetic and bardic, while not less 
dramatic, than the Elizabethan. The man who taught it was soon intent on 
far more important lessons. He let this one drop unrepeated. Its effect in 
literature has not yet been felt for a sufficient reason. The style of his work is 
totally unadapted for the writing of sconnable prose, or even for moulding the 
measures of a moderately poetic expression. Its flights and pauses are so daunt- 
Icssly emphatic that any ono who yields to them, must, like their first inventor, 
bo roused into a strongly voiced, full thoughted fiery dream, or failing this, show 
his thin muse betrayed, like a lean dancer hi sunshine at a fair. But when the 
sneaking doubt of Blake's madness is driven away for ever, and bis method 
stands in tho great lists of literature ready to meet all comers on equal terms, 
these verses will hardly fail to teach even those whom they overthrow. 






NODES TO THE POETICAL SKETCHES, SONGS, (fee. 



The MS. book contains several of these songs mixed up with some of the 
Songs of Experience, and with others never included in either set, though 
apparently originally intended for such use. See above, Volume I., p. 205. Among 
these, the following seems to have been rejected in favour of " The Introduction," 
or " Earth's Answer," at the beginning of the Songs of Experience. See Volume 
I., p. 209. 



TO NOBODADDY. 

WHY art thou silent and invisible ? 

Father of Jealousy, 

Why dost thou hide thyself in clouds 

From every passing eye ? 

Why darkness and obscurity 

In all thy words and laws 

That none can eat the fruit but from 

The wily serpent's jaws, 

Or is it because secrecy gains feminine applause ? 

%* At the close of the songs as printed in the Aldine edition the editor gives 
a " second version " of " The Tiger " on what he calls MS. authority. He does 
not say whose MS. In Blake's book, called here " the MS. book," the first draft 
of the poem is to be found. It is re-produced here with all its corrections. 
The words printed in italics have all been crossed out by Blake's pen. To 
remove them entirely would leave broken verses. Even when he engraved the 
poem, as is shown in the first version given above, Blake forgot to alter the 
last line of the third stanza, but left it just as it stood when it was meant to 
lead on to a fourth, beginning " could filch it " of which not more than three 
lines were even written. 

In Gilchrist's book Dante Gabriel Bossetti has edited into 

" What dread hand, formed thy dread feet ? " 

which stops the pace of the verse hopelessly. Made, would have hurt it less, 
and done its work as well. To pronounce/ormed, in one syllable, three consonants 
must be brought together in the mouth. "Thy" being the next word brings 
r m d th all in one mass. This gags, and wastes time. 
Some sort of editor for Blake is seen, nevertheless, to be a necessity. 



THE TIGEE. 

(MS. VEBSION WITH BLAKE'S COBBEC'l'IONS.) 
1. 

TIGEB, Tiger, burning bright 

In the forests of the night, 

What immortal hand or eye 

Dare could frame thy fearful symmetry ? 



92 NOTES TO THE POETICAL SKETCHES, SONGS, &C. 

2. 

In what distant deeps or skies 
Burned the fire within thine eyes ? 
On what wings dared he aspire ? 
What the hand dared seize the fire ? 

3. 

And what shoulder and what art 
Could twist the sinews of thy heart ? 
And when thy heart began to beat, 
What dread hand and what dread feet 

4. 

Could filch it from the furnace deep 
And in thy horn'd ribs dare steep 
In the well of sanguine woe 
* * ? 

In what clay and in what mould 
Were thine eyes of fury roll'd. 



Where the hammer, where the chain, 

In what furnace was thy brain? 

What the anvil ? What the arm, grasp, clasp, dread grasp 

Dared thy deadly terrors clasp ? 

Tiger, Tiger, burning bright 

In the forests of the night, 

What immortal hand and eye 

Dare form frame thy fearful symmetry ? 



(Over page, two verses, one erased, the other corrected.) 
Burnt in distant deeps or skies, 
The cruel fire of thine eye, 
Could heart descend or wings inspire 
What the hand dared seize the fire ? 

5. 

3 And did he laugh dare he smile laugh his work to see 
What the shoulder * * * ankle * * * what the knee 

4 Did He who made the lamb make thee ? 

1 When the stars threw down their spears 

2 And watered heaven with their tears. 

After this stanza 1, 2, 3 are copied out, and number 1 repeated as a fourth, 
and then the whole erased. This is all the MS. of the Tiger with all its 
corrections. 

The order of the above songs is taken from a very beautiful copy one of 
Blake's last which bears the name Edwards, and the date May, 1828. It was 




NOTES TO THE POETICAL SKETCHES, SONGS, &C. 93 

presumably sold by Mrs. Blake to " Edwards " after Blake's death (1827). It 
was bought in the Beckford collection by Mr. Quaritch in 1882. The only 
difference from the above consists in the fact that the song called " The garden 
of Love " begins " I went to the garden, <fcc.," and does not contain the two first 
stanzas, printed with it in some editions. In the MS. Book Blake has divided 
them by a long line from the other stanzas, showing that he counted them as a 
separate poem. 

The MS. book furnishes some further lines also belonging to the song " Infant 
Sorrow," which were omitted by Blake when engraving it, but shed light on the 
symbolic intention of the song, and connect it with Enitharmon, Ore, and Hyle. 
Compare book of " Urizen," also " America," Preludium, p. 2, 1. 4, and " Vala," 
Night VII., from 1. 1G6, and all Night VIII., and Volume I., Chapter on the Worm. 
(The engraved version is above, p. 57. A note on it in Volume II., p. 15.) 
After the line 

" To sulk upon my mother's breast," 

the MS. continues thus (the italics are erased words, the asterisks represent 
words illegible in the original) :-^- 

When I saw that rage was vain 

And to sulk would nothing gain, 

Turning many a trick and wile 

I began to * * * * seeking many an artful * * * * 

I began to soothe and smile. 

And I grew soothed, day after day, 
Till upon the ground I lay, 
And I grew smiled, night after night, 
Seeking only for delight. 

But upon tlie earthly ground 
No delight my * * * found. 

And I saw before me shine 
Clusters of the wandering vine, 
And many a lovely flower and tree 
And, beyond, a myrtle tree, 
Stretched its their blossoms out to me. 

But a priest My father then with holy book 
In his their hands a holy book 
Pronounced curses on his my head 
Who the fruit or blossoms shed, 
And bound me in a myrtle shade. 

I beheld the priests by night, 

They embraced my myrtle * * * the blossoms * * * bright 

I beheld the priests by day 

Where beneath my*** underneath the* * * vine they * * * he * * * lay. 

3 Like a ... to ... serpents in the night, 

4 They embraced my myrtle * * * blossom * * * bright 
1 Like a serpent in the * * * to holy men by * * * day 

2 Underneath my the, vines they lay. 



94 NOTES TO THE POETICAL SKETCHES, SONGS, &C. 

So I smote him, them and his their gore 
Stained the roots my myrtle bore ; 
But the time of youth is fled, 
And grey hairs are on my head. 



So ends the poem. The child is the " Infant Joy," and is as symbolic as 
the "babe" in the Mental Traveller. Tho whole poem leads on to that called 
" In a myrtle shade," which is evidently a second attempt to embody in verse 
part of the same symbolic story. The MS. gives a text of this also more 
copious than the final form as printed above. Tho never printed line about 
the myrtle sighing to behold the chain is particularly needed if the whole is to be 
understood. 

To a lovely myrtle bound, 
Blossoms showering all around. 

2 Oh how weak and weary I 
Underneath my myrtle lie, 
Like to dung upon the ground 
Underneath my myrtle bound. 

1 Why should I be bound to thee, 
Oh my lovely myrtle tree ? 
Love, free love, cannot be bound 
To any tree that grows on ground. 

Oft my myrtle sighed in vain, 

To behold my heavy chain. 

Oft the priest beheld my father saw us sigh 

And laughed at our simplicity. 

So I smote him, and his gore 
Stained the roots my myrtle bore. 
But the time of youth is ilcd, 
And grey hairs are on my head. 



But all this about the chain, which is evidently the veil of Vala, the Mundane 
Shell, <fcc., as the Myrtle is the body, was afterwards absorbed into the dream of 
the Maiden Queen, in the Song of Experience called the Angel, which ends 
with the same couplet. The infant is the same as that bound by the priest in 
The Garden of Love, and A Little Boy Lost. All the infants are Ore, who 
becomes a serpent when the chain has grown into him, put there by the Urizen- 
like portion of Los. A little further, on the same page of the MS. book as " A 
Little Boy Lost " is written, the myrtle is found once more, re-arranged for pub- 
lication, with a title. The erasures and numbcrings as follows : 



NOTES TO THE POETICAL SKETCHES, SONGS, &C. 95 

TO MY MYRTLE. 

Why should I be bound to thee 
Oh my lovely myrtle tree, 
Love, free love cannot be bound 
To any tree that grows on ground. 
To a lovely myrtle bound, 
Blossoms showering all around, 
Like to dung upon the ground, 
Underneath my myrtle bound 
Oh how weak and weary I 
Underneath my myrtle lie. 

While beside it in pencil a few words of a stanza which was rejected may still 
be faintly traced. 

Deceit to seeming * * * 
******* refined 
To everything but interest blind, 
And * * * fetters every mind, 
And forges fetters of the mind. 

The beautiful quatrian called The Lily, was reduced to this form from a fuller 
sketch. It is also a study in symbolic statement, and can be understood with 
perfect certainty only by help of its erased lines, which should be read once and 
forgotten. 

The rose modest lustful rose puts envious puts forth a thorn. 

The coward humble sheep a threatening horn. 

While the lily white shall in Love delight, 

And the lion increase freedom and peace, 

The priest loves war and the soldier peace, 

Nor a thorn, nor a threat, stain her beauty bright. 

Other rejected readings from the MS. book have no value for interpretation. 
One may only be mentioned as an example of Blake's frank writing. He desires 
to find in a wife the lineaments of gratified desire such aa he discovers in 
women of immoral life, of whom he speaks in the old-fashioned scriptural word 
of one syllable the verse is unfinished. 

Above it is " The Fairy," not given in the Aldine edition and accidentally 
omitted in the chapter on the MS. book, Volume I. Mr. Swinburne has printed 
this in his essay under Blake's first title (erased in MS.) The Marriage King. 

The arrows, like the sparrows, are emotions of the heart (whose symbolic 
region is air, through which they fly). The connection with fairies belongs to 
the symbolic use of these in " Jerusalem," p. 13, 1. 29, p. 63, 1. 14, and 
p. 97, 1. 12, in the preface to " Europe," where the fairy of the heart leaves 
guarding the gate of the head in south to dictate the story of the head in north. 
The fairies are also the same as those of the poem William Bond. 

These verses are not in any sense nursery rhymes. Symbolic poetry may use 
the form of the fanciful but it will retain its own coherence. It is when not 
symbolic that Fancy produces what Milton calls her " wild work," 



96 NOTES TO THE POETICAL SKETCHES, SONGS, &C. 

In this song the word marriage must be considered as pronounced in three 
syllables or the whole melody is jerked away. 



THE MARRIAGE RING. THE FAIRY. 

Come hither, my sparrows, 
My little arrows, 
If a tear or a smile 
Will a man beguile, 
If an amorous delay 
Clouds a sunshiny day, 
If the tread step of a foot 
Smites the heart to its root, 
'Tis the marriage ring 
Makes each fairy a king. 

So a fairy sang ; 

From the leaves I sprang. 

He leaped from the spray 

To flee away, 

But in my hat caught 

He soon shall be taught 

Let him laugh, let him cry, 

He's my butterfly ; 

For I've pulled out the sting 

Of the marriage ring. 



Mr. Swinburne follows this with another fragment given in a foot-note to his 
Essay, p. 143. This, he says, is copied from a loose scrap of paper on which is 
a sketch of Hercules throttling the serpents. 

A fairy leapt upon my knee 
Singing and dancing merrily. 
I said, " Thou thing of patches, rings, 
Pins, necklaces, and such like things, 
Disgracer of the female form. 
Thou pretty gilded poisonous worm I " 
Weeping he fell upon my thigh 
And thus in tears did soft reply, 
" Knowest thou not, Fairies' Lord, 
How much by us contemned, abhorr'd, 
Whatever hides the female form 
That cannot bear the mortal storm ? 
Therefore in pity still we give 
Our lives to make the female live, 
And what would turn into disease 
We turn to what will joy and please." 



NOTES TO THE POETICAL SKETCHES, SONGS, &C. 97 

Mr. Swinburne has also noted some of the rejected readings for the poem 
called "The Two Songs," beginning "I heard an Angel singing." The Devil's 
curse in it stands in the MS. as follows italics still representing erased words : 

I heard a Devil curse 
Over the heath and furze, 
Mercy could be no more 
If there were nobody poor, 
And pity no more could be 
If all were happy as ye we. 
Thus he sang At his curse the sun went down 
And the heavens gave a frown. 
. Down poured the heavy rain 
Over the new reaped grain, 
And Mercy, and Pity, and Peace descended ; 
The farmers were ruined, and harvest was ended. 
And Mercy, Pity, Peace, 
Did at the, time increase 
With poverty' s increase; 
And by distress increase 
Mercy, pity, peace, 
By miseries increase 
Mercy, pity, peace. 
And Miseries' increase 
Is Mercy, Pity, Peace. 

Here, as elsewhere, we literally see the thoughts condense, as what was at 
first a mere scheme for a poem becomes a poem. Here, as elsewhere, the metre 
is practically left to take care of itself, a thing it succeeds in doing better than 
in some of the " long resounding long heroic lines," while all the attention of 
the poet is given to the idea that grows up in him while he writes. 

The connection having been traced between what lies within the compass of 
the collection of Songs, and the shorter poems outside which, though already 
well known, are here reprinted they follow in their turn. 



VOL. in. 



THERE IS NO NATURAL 
RELIGION. 



THERE IS NO NATURAL RELIGION. 



The Voice of one crying in the Wilderness. 



THE ARGUMENT. 

As the -true method of knowledge is experiment ; the true faculty 
of knowing must be the faculty which experiences. This faculty 
I treat of. 

PRINCIPLE FIRST. 

That the Poetic Genius is the true Man, and that the body or 
outward form of Man is derived from the Poetic Genius. Likewise, 
that the forms of all things are derived from their Genius, which 
by the Ancients was call 'd an Angel and Spirit and Demon. 

PRINCIPLE SECOND. 

As all men arc alike in outward form, so (and with the same 
infinite variety) all are alike in the Poetic Genius. 

PRINCIPLE THIRD. 

No man can think, write or speak from his heart, but he must 
intend truth. Thus all sects of Philosophy are from the Poetic 
Genius, adapted to the weaknesses, of every individual. 

PRINCIPLE FOURTH. 

As none by travelling over known lands can find out the unknown ; 
so from already acquired knowledge Man could not acquire more ; 
therefore an universal Poetic Genius exists. 



PRINCIPLE FIFTH. 

The Religions of all Nations are derived from each Nation's different 
reception of the Poetic Genius, which is everywhere call'd the Spirit 
of Prophecy. 

PRINCIPLE SIXTH. 

The Jewish and Christian Testaments are an original derivation 
from the Poetic Genius. This is necessary from the confined nature 
of bodily sensation. 

PRINCIPLE SEVENTH. 

As all men are alike (though infinitely various), so all Religions, 
and as all similars, have one source. 

The true Man is the source, he being the Poetic Genius. 



This little book is copied from illustrated leaves in the possession of the Liunell 
family, and is in itself a comment on the similar pamphlet in the British Museum, 
here reproduced in facsimile. 




ercctioia.he er- 




D ^ ^ --< 

rleatfon or me ra- 
tio of al 



we 



know 



more- 




Prom a perception of j 
only ^ tenses or 3 elel 
merits' none couW De- 
duce ,a fourt or fif^i . 



L 

A None r ould hav* other 

tkarv j\jtural or organic 




jrcepti 

"none 1 can de 
ewkatKekajnot 

r c * cv ^ <&&> 
n3K 

^^-^ .^M\ 

* a lsi 

-- "- 




^ 



_ 

tiling tut organs of f'f 
sentfe , must tc limJbed }L 
to objects ofjyefise - 



be a& he- 

-*^ ^s ' 





cazwot. natto-ftlly R?a 
cieve .tut tliroi^li Kis 



er 1 Do or 







tfMr'.i> Mjhr,ji,".lj. .>*;.> ., it Savour . 

J~J "* ., his^t'A'o Sons ,5lta)\Si/\.dam. as they were copied icomtkc CKCTwHM 
o{Solomcr\sTemplrbryttxi-eeRKo<lians'<fcapplied toNtturj.1 Fact or Histoiryof Jlium 



fc'3'^ ?- 

S " - R2- 



Every Jbrm. Jmi-vt ftesv/r&v/?- t>r <*. perfect 
ift^srv IT tmeiuuvir JTO I wuvct. cKu : At 




L&ce/ST^ rvcky Country Eve Jjit 

'' 




|n ->?-jL i&csi. ixtJiy CZveft&trOJf.iovaA feuntitt&fccuser&./fvengt 
^~2'-Qftflo G 'ZOart& Cover nottfau t&ejBlvo^o/sfAel 





d&n.otflfaqt.'Hvre t,t not octtrrtooeujeve \t.?WJi\ 
X Wdtfi vii our /ru.A/itA^strfngt/i t/ic v^e asf mfy>fi & tos't \ 
. Eve t&ou. Aasclyyotesi truly, let us kneel leJoreAiz f^t \ 



^V*>^ *7~Aer S<nc*' t>$fore JeAoyuJt X^-^^-^^^r-^^ 

/U>cL^/^fre eAese &e3^nc&^ta7u'OJefa'aX.. aBrcJbAj5p"-iL \ 

^crgivefeAf SfccufierJintJi. , 

i ~. .7 -. Je JtoatAz tAy jbfrnaclex ', 

tnou. AtLSft jttuLJto cy it com*, to/toss Mydestrtts unJbo Gun * 




^f^aG>*ert&tfe&t.OSciyM>LjFcrgu'effarfc^^ , 

Justfoufe & flee 



z> EtiOerd into Me a* into. 



'ut-MfjfaA rule otfcrSfe therefore /tySmtlm Kmcs at'Bisoct* 
crdu.y aft Scicrtfjce Bteoiion OuwtL ; 



i3ror 



^.njnb &r <xn.jq&>nt>jti>-nt isiXCcajctt 

^!* \ "^ {^rtrte^vLns^rcsvf\ta'Jwf2&^c^JS^i:c^u^ey'^'^iie^~A 
/76e^. Coinpe&eJJcrr OE<u*ri cawjwt t/ij$Loocc'{&c{4* ) 
~t*~*^FZ'^/(&el SfinAs tb>*Hl into tk Gravc.Jrnai *>fucA ^ttrise$alwt \ 
' ~^/Trmee.Ln. gttttering \sccdes *'tCh-a. Cro^/t <5&a Spear A>^*S\. \ 
^atun?J.wiU.Aa.ve?fusnuiBloocC &c,notttue BfoodorBulkorGovtg^ 
J Jl/tfL noSttonefnept OJiR&o>"tA~ tJi& E&Tum ftjto qn*S<irr-eKc<: 
T : /testce Jam. GrQct of Men. :7Aou rfumaji. 
>-A&>OaA 



. - 

^&* OatA. Eternal fire; ttey r-o 




HE A YEN 




f*j Tte Aj&ment . 

^p^^^""^^ w^ 

I RiniraJi roanr & shaker itf tresr in, tne turaend air; 
Hi-u^ry clouds' yvvag on. die deep ^ 

.^awT , 

r OncemeeK, and in a perilous path, _, 
\ TKe fttft 0cn. itept Kis course alor^ ^^ 

v*TrF 'I * i l ' - - -^ * -^ 



are 



. Siif^tfie Iu>n0)r Leear 

vSS^'-^**^ ^^ ^ ^pif 

^ Tlifn me perilous patk was" planted ; 

K A I *' J ' * 

And a rrver.a/xd aspJing 
On every c\j& and tzxnL ; 
( And on me oleacKed !>one*! 

T -T-J" i i 4 j rt I 

~ Jtea clay onx^il rortix <^ 

'*"' j&**y*yy 

131 tKtf vJlain. left me patka of eatfe, 
To walk in penlous pafjks', and drive 
TRe just man into barren di'jr 

Now tke sheaJat^ serpent wa 
la n old luimiljt^. 
And t/iejust man rises' in 1 
j \VKcre fionar roam. ^&> 

-* sr*( 



I. VV ~ V J >1J W 

(jurdeiui air ; 
Htuignr ctoud^r swa^ on tfi deep , 



.4* 








.rs\2?M 

Hectfeti is? begun, and it is nod tnir- 
^ ^^ ds acbent: tnelEternaLHelL 

revises. And lo! jSv/edenborg isf ttte Angel.gitktig 
& the t&mb;}iis rtrdingp are me linen cbmesfoBzo 
Uf). New isrtne dominion, cflLcloni, Sdhe return of 
A^aun^jrctc raradisfe; &ee Is:aijah JBXW&XMtfOwf>: 
ut Cabnartesf tsr tu> proSre&ioa .Attraction 

t T" If T*"S T I ^. 



Hate, ar<s necewary to Human m&tence . 
From west contraries spring what the 
GoocL&Evil. Good is 




**? real extstu^ print* 



. ui 
Good, tar ohmc xrwn, 



. - ^ rr 

ronear in these <tr>elrtie 
fty dtadttocf foot Aiy+So ""^ 
isr cLbartaan. eF+SfcuL cuscernp 
ay -the. *&eHgtosr. the 



ft&jrft-r- 





tttea 



- 

restrain destine, do sro b&xtv&e 
o 2>e restrained; atd the restrainer or 
reason usfuxpg ets place, & governs die unrtill 

&Sree3 becomes? paa*>e 




notary ofttug & -ritten in Tirrctd&eLosf. 



s 



te on&utftt Ar3icuyeL or pc&etsfor of me cextt 
th hcaventy host, tsf caJfeL theD&tl or Saftzn, 
ajuljusr cftdJren. are eaJlet Sin, Deci& ^^^ 

BaJctfJU MH&n* Me&lah & cctttd 

""^^^^ ^^^^^r^ ^ 

this Ju&foryJtair been. adopt&Lljy Lock partte&J 
It indeed abpeareL fo Jteastatt asr tf Desire vtasf 

', In* ttieD&H* account ist. &at &eMe& 

ah 



an iM.kbrmedakeaven. at what he stole from 3ie 

^ Jnisr tar shewn tn me Gospel, whene Itepntpg to me. 
rather to jfenJL the oauJSrtw or Desire that Heason 
hcatelJeaaf toliuldon. the Jehovah, of theBttlt 
no other than he whc tbtellf 





, the S 



on, a, 



in Milton; the Jbdter tar __,.._ 

futtto or thextve-sfenstes.lfthe mop-gkogt* vacuum} 

HLXf^fe.^26 reason Milton wrote in sttu& when 

ie vtvte ef Angela 6c GoJ, and at liberty when of 

Devils kflell t is leraue Tit utour true Poet emd t 




the Greg ofnal % dtt 
th the enjoyment* arGenujLS; tvAicn 
Look uie torment arui vwcuifty.l collected jtonu 
o teir Bviterh*; fn/ni/wf that OB me 
in a nation, motif cfy charajeter, jfo i 
Betl,sd*ert the juttur^ cf Infernal wt&elam belte 
than, any description 

came home; on 




. wAere a &at&uktL sfoef* f^nafoifer thepre- 
-sent world. I paw a u$& Devil ldeJ> en black 
clouJsf ruwerituf on the sides or we rvcK,vttm cor- 

\^f\ ft uwmr ^. . L T*^ v ( / ^ .^ 









trote te >otfn sentence new ten 
me /nuutgr cfjnett, 6c read 'ly them on earth, 

OH' to you Jcn0vv fcut ev/T-Btitl tnat cuts tfc atiy way. 

* fi r i r i f if'^ **^*'f V 

an jmmense world of ddnt.ctosarviuir s&tsey aver 




tune learn , in harvest teadi, in winter enjoy 
^ KIT cart andyow plow over die tones of the JeadL 
;%e rood of ercefs teeaaf to tfie palace i/ >*isfdoot . | 
. BWeitce jar a nek ufejy of J maid courted ty Im^parjU . 

W J. J I ?*_A. u 1 " *' ^ 

He who destoes but act not , bre4 

' r lf T f^ * I 

lae cut worm lorgn/es' the pio>y . 

j JDip mm, in. the river wno lovesc u 

| A Jool sees' aot ate s'ame tnee tnat A wisre man &ee&, 

He wkosre race ^ive^ no Jj^jFtt.jjtalJ ii\rer oecome 
! Eternr^- & uv love -wrtk tne DnxfuctJoiis' of tune* 

Tie tiisy tee Ita^ no time fer gorrow, 
\e nonrar or rally are mcasutxl t>y ttte clock, out ot 




Jom:no clodC caa tneusure . 
wnotffom food is' cai^Kt MatJtout a IU^T or a 
firif^ out ttundter *vei^t ^ tnea^re mayea 

Wo tirct soar^tbo liij^k.FJie fiToars.' wtk hL< own. 

Ai i i j 
deaa Jxxfy: reven2* ea^ not 
rrr Mf *^* .1 

Jhe mast W>lime act w/ to j*t anotfusr Jiehineyott. 

jJ^ lie vwJdlcoome 
isr tke cloke oTknavwrf. 
ame is R-J Jesr doke . 









'Ike watk of thelion k tke wisdom ofGocl . 
Ike nakeitte& of woman isrme'warkcf Sod. 
Eacce& of ganrcfo Jaudjisr JExceB cfjop weegtf 

of tKe ^storn^^ea . ana me destructive 
paHionar or Eternity too ^yat ferllie .eye of jnan 

mrt i ^t 

IB Try cottaetitns' ie tn^ 

- is - unpre^tate. ^Sorrowsr faring fcrtk. >rf ^^ . . 
L*et man. wear tk& Jell of tke lioit. woman, tke fleece or 

Ike ouxl a itest. me ^iicUr a web, man rnemlsfup . 
Tke ^elhsk atwlii^feJ.^j"Ae sullen irowiut^lDol. 
ke botk tkou^kt Wsre. tkat tkejr may lye & iwi . 

_ , Cf . *^. t' * * I 

what wr now provea waeT ottce^onkr imajjui. 

Tke rat, me mouse. rfiefeoc.tiie j-anket ; wattk tke roots, 




, 

ike fruits', ^ 

Tiua cistern, cottbun^r; tne iomttain. ovs 
immensity 




Every itung possikie in 1> kdjevU iaf an. ura&e ofirum. 
iiewer Jost 50 muck iiine.asr wken. kc ^tinout- 

4__/ ^AL 

-tedto learn oTJie crow. >^teOfc3^>^^' 







& liflC'|>i tjvidfts' for kiaisetf, but God pnovulesr for me Loa. 
ink uv tke morning, Act jiv tnc nooit.JLat: ov ike 
-ink jpleej) uvtiie tutekfc> 
He who ka^ ^uuerd, yoato jmpos'e otvlum. 

.! i P*1 J /"^ t 

./W thfc blow jollowsf wo.nds,4o trod rewt 
w^^^ens^ of wradt are wi^er tkanike hoi^asT c* ^t* 
Expect poison, from tKe ^fcandi^ >vater ^structtofl, 
jou rterer know wltai* is enoujk unieis^ VODU. know >vbatt i^ 
"*W -tka Sk 

rsben. to tke fcoW reproackj. tfc is^ a kwt^/ tine \ 

, eyes of -fire,t{teno5trilsr of air. tke ntoutkof >vater, 

ike beard of earik. 
weak in courage tS' ^tronb JA ciui-fitrik . 

. ^^ I <^ /;! _ . 

af)plfl iree aever asks ike beeck kow He jwiau Jrcw, 
iwr me liott.tke koi^ejiow Ke stall take k.J p^X"- 
Ihe ttianlcfif recie^er kears a olfintilul harvest . , 

: otHeiT*? bad not beeit iioolisni , we skould be sro . / 
soul nr .sweet delifeftt, can. never be dafilcl , 

^ * ^^^ /"* f"f ' 

timu ^eest an -Lage, ihou ,sees a borbort ol (-rft 

^As iiie catterp'Jler ckoosesr tke ftirest leaved te \&f 

^Cf ker e!*&& on , jsb tne l)'iest' LJVJS 'u/ ciLnsre on- 

w ii_ r^,i ^ I 

^ the tairestr loycsr'. 

~r* I-'T' Q j i i P * 

Jo create a iittlell^wer is" trte labour or ages'. 

Damn, braces' : Blei^ relaxes'. 

ILe best wine is tke oldest, tke best water tke newest, 
iraytLry plow not. Praises' reap not*. ->^ ^^ 
JoysT lau^k TU>t f ^oiTowa weep not! ^jr'' 

~~~~ - : - a - J 



r u II 

~wj^ ~y lOFt* f ' W~~ ~~~ ' ^ m ^ w ^"" ~ ^ "A * *(T1* ^^n i^^t-" ~^"~ 

TFie Wad Sutlime.tke lteartBrtliasr,tke ptita!ar Jjeatrty, 

^-> ilie lianas Af feet Iroporhan . 

As tfie air to a bind or tke Create a fisk^o i 



crow wisW !vey tiling var Uack. tlie owl ,lliat eve- 

*\ * i *"* - v> 

-ry thin^ wa^ wiute . -^jfc^C ^xf^ 

T? L ^ "D *fiSS*^ ^JQJH^ _ x 

Exuberance isr JOeautv' . - *** "^ 

If tke lion was afjvrsealy thekKUtewoula lie 
latproyent makes' strait roaAa, hut the crocJfect 
witkcHlt Iinprovema/tt . ere .floods^ or uetuufiT 
Sooner murJer an ui&nt in its cradle than nursre 





LA/I ** >. I ft 

Where Auut w nor ttatung isf barren I 

Irufn. can never l>e trld s<> afiT to 
W not tc J> elievit , 





^Jfie anaent tcete ammatecL aEgensthk objects 
wABoasar&muse&.call^iheewylM names an3<?\ 

^** CL^ **& e: *f~~~t ^f *"^ ~**"^ ^f** 

adorjun Stem tfdtime properties of woods ; r^i^r^ 
nwurtbunsr. lakesf, dties, nahoxsf, atul whatever their 
enlarged, & tuzmefvusr tfensfesf cotuxL bercteve $P&~ 

' -,. r^ r ^ 'ill ****' ^<rv. / ^"""A 

jLbi/ia particularly they \stu3teel *> fyniuA aTeadi 

'^"^^ ^r*^2***n -. / J-%e** 

it under as metwal <tedy.&* 

>rme$, which srome 'took, ctl- 

^ ^Wttltempb'fl&'fo 

*e orabstnact me mental deities JraaL 



ex worship mm poetic il 

'LrlW c kn^ther prwcwi^mat the Gods 
nad ardent 





, 

a&stt. lkxt Gxi&pake to them; 3t) whether 
Julnct -Bunk at tfie tttne f mat: they rtould be 
y & &o ie ine. cause cfetnpo&cb 
an&denl. I sfeewjw GotL, nor 

n a nite oigtnwatl pencepben ; 
/ *- / *i G - /* . / i^ I ' fi r 
a&coverd me trdwdx. in evgry trung, and cesfl 

mmpeK&aJecl.fcretJtftut cottRroui;inat 
-Voice fffJ: inJ&udton t& the voice 




afvd nat&r cen&ecfuenees iut 

asked,: twesf a Jnrm petsyasiaii -that a, 

o< make et&o ?-"*^% IB^-^-^J C^^^ 
replied, AILpoetff Idiette. that it eloe&* <& 

m ages' of ttna&nabon tfusr/uvt peKsrtaffte/t retno 
*<-y <o. r t f n 

ffL.awuntaunsf: but marry are turt caable of CL 





. lh& philosophy of the easft 
'iplesf of human perception. ^ 
nations, held, one principle fir the origin, be 

e another, \tfe of ^Israel ' tuugfct that tkRetuc 

/ _. it , i ^^./ p i 

v call ct) wc& the. tost principle 

[ rnenely Jerufabvz, htfuc/i wastlhz 
cau&e of our desjxsrituL the Trieste fcj%ulosophj&ns 
other counkrtcsr, ana prSphecying that dJi G0ds 

^V^M>nrniir<^*^^llfc^^^ & WQULd, f 

*^ . - ' -! >. -*-^J 







i mm w ^ * r y - ; 

1 Mould at last be braved to originate in out& Ac to be me 

f > /\ t M+ *****. .t ./ ^ii" "-<. ' 



; bib uterus cfibe loettc Getuusr, ft rtas mis . 

! &&zt poet Ku&DaVul de&tredAtoieWeiittx &c Invokes 

i& A . , & .* i .+ ^.>. ,---> , 




'tnsr; cuvlwejsto wed our Gfoa,. 
nines' name all the dteikesf ar,sia*r<w 
nations!, and a&srtect wab^mepliacl repelled; fraxti\ 
these cbuuottsr the vulgar came to uunt< that all. judL? 

J t t t 1 ^^ I 1 ' ^^fljIBfc 

"Otis' vJould at last J>e sfuoiect 6? tw&jevtg \J? ^8BP\X 
\tsf &udbe t like all nrtxibersdt&tonsf, is come bo 
; for odl naJbtonsf beuetfe tne tews code and wor- 
p tne/eu& doct, and wkatgr&xter gtJyecban can t& 
1 I heard trusr with &ome bonder. &? must cajm&i 
ffiy ortn oHwichon . After dinner fasAH IsfaUt faJar] 
vour the world with, ht& last Moris', fie &aul nane <zPj 
equal value vfasf Lo^t ^E^^J<tfi said me&vne cfni&, } 

ItrJsQ asked. I&<tt3h, whfctjtuule Juatjfo naked <m^j 
/ /* i * % / i '"i Vi * i \ 

barefock mrazyeoa&.'Jte an&twa,, the stounetnat model 

our inctuL IjioAeiies' tlie Grecian. . ^^v^^^'jj 

TT f ft ^^** ^HK t f ^^^t&^^ ' "%|^^^ W 

1 then wmed JEftekust * why he eat duryf, ic Lay Jo ; 

tofjff ^nJrusf **&" &* left Afcae? Jte anstotem, trie efe&irv } 

! or tvuLffutfJi dmer men trtto a. perception, or me utand& 

duef the, . 

Y-estt umo reCtsrts ht& 

\ 




i ^*j 




Q/ne 



cuudenk truchtron, that tJtt> *)orl<L vriU, be con 
in, fine <xt the end cf^'i 




\& to leave liisf board . 

j *^^g j 

!*= *' rwe/t lie cioe&j trie nt/wle crecctton. 

oe con&unett, and, appear iaf 

wkereaar cb nov) appears? &vfe t corrupt. 

1tu& wtll come to pcf by an, unbrevement or 
i&cnsru/zL ^njoyoi^n^^-^^^f'^^f^^^sf'^^^*^ 
jLJut' iiKsUuvs. notion, iita/b man hast a. h 
custutcb jrojti Ills' &oul, esf to ie exput&ecl; 
T-1-J^ ^^jpfintu^ln die. id&juiLmethad.Jiy 
tfe&j, vtnijck UL ttell tire statutory and me-. 

fift/^ afgctrent sUr/ace? i****?* &*itL 
Q itte umute which uktsf huL, 
e. ctocxsf at perception, were cU 
'YfiutfL appear by jnan 

7^35^- .__ II ^^L .. ; ^. Jl" "~n^_ 

J3r jtnanTtasr clas&l Juatgelttw, fti 




all tftin^p ihro narnori chinks arJu 





Has In. a Trintuig bouse utOell Sc s&*r the 
method, ui wA&h /ftto&ledge tsr transmitted om ene~ 
to 



In. me cat chamber vets' a. . 

a*)ay Ae ruhktsk from a, coyest moutfi ;wiAin t 
number at Drains were IwUovlinfe ike c 

In. the second encumber vast tx. viper 
the rock & the cave, and. others atorn.ut<> ft 
&3ver and precious stotteg ^tsr***^ ^ ^~& 

In t/ue third chamber vtttsi an Eafete tvit/t *>u*'gs; 
and moaners of * air, he caused, the uu&de <tthe cave 
to be infinite, around rtere twmbers aT Ela&ie like jgl 
tnen. , wfa) built palace^ in the immense cuJ&. +s$} 

In the urdi c/utmker were I*ton of Btutorig fire 
ra &r& aneHin d- melting ffte enetalsf into living 5wuJ& 

Mttne n/th. chjocm&er #ene Ktittexmd /arms , *>/udi 
cast the meteLs into the expansre , ^f* ''^*ikaf f '^ \ 
^Ikcm ifw vfene recievdlylfen u)tw vceupi&l 
the jftxth, chamber, ttnd took the fitrtnsf cf b 
lucre arraribej. ut libraries, 





Jhe GUUI& who finned thief vtorld uctr, dsr 
existence met now fe&n, to la>e tn it 
e/t cJtatnsqare tn, truth, the cauatef of its 
% ike sources ofcM activity, hit the % cht 

', the cunning af^ea/c and tame tmndsf. Mihuh 
& porter to re&isk enafyg. according bo the pro 
Weak ut courtjbf tsf gbranfa in auuun^ 
one portion ot Jfet/i^ uf tne ^rrcldic. "h 
other, the Devouring: to the detourer it&semsf 
ir the producer **& in luaf chains, tut it 
he cnty tahesf pcrbusns cf existence 
that th* rthoU. *^><Xx^ 

J3ut the ~R*JiBc vtould cease to he Jroteac 
unleGf the Devcarer oaf a' sna rectet>ed the excete 
dThisr deti^ttff. ^''"- ^ '-^ 

-Seme wL Jfay, Tef not Gcd alone t/tf Jroluici 
T2/t9Ufcr, God eidyActs&Isr* In existutfc iei* 

TT / /* /* / C^ii^i 

JLrtesfe two cuxisetf <zr tnen are antfey& upon 

earth.. & they dwuLei he enemies; wtoever tries' 



J7 



to reconcile them s&nsr to destroy existence . 

isr an endeavour to reconcile the two. 
, Uesus dnri&t did not u>tsn to unite 




^QSrote. . Jesfus C%rtjst did not u>ish to tutfteM 
hut to seferate them, ay in the RnxUe cfstuvp anri, 
(foots? J Jf he saysr laaau* not tu jsrend Race hut a. 



or Satan, oriempter Mtfasf formerly 
t& he one aF the Jbtedthtnansf rtho are our 




...-.- - - ;vi -,,..... Q ^ 

Mn JanfefL came to me and&aicL O pttiatle jwhyli 
fe man. ! C horrible ! dreaJSd state ! f*0nsfid*r 



*< 

the hot lurninQ dunfaan thau. art preparing r thpsfelt 

to all eternity, tz vftuds, thou. art fepuife in, suea .career. 
*y I staid . perhaps? you. vt'dl he %*tUin ft> shew ate 
eternal lot c we will contemplate, toother upon, it 
f see vfhetheryour lot or mute ief mast 



"*-CJ^^: took me thro 9 a jgtnile &: mre* a. church. 
Ac down, itttn the church vault a the end or vJueh, 
Wasr et mill ; -thro' the mill vte went , and came, to at 
cave, dorfn the winding cavern *)e fejrvped our tech - 
-ttusf u)ay ml a Void ]>oundle& a& a wether d& <*f>* 
tfbeneeeth usf. & we hetdjp the nwtsr at tree* 
hunfe 0ver tfuar uninensrdy* iut I saui* ifvou, 
Y<e ute. rtitt commct ourselves? to t/u& itoui,&uL 
whether nrovtdenee u* here alsfo, tfyou will /tab 
Jtifiu? hub he, anstfertL, Jo not fuvsiume Ojwunk - 
man but <xsf *re here remain, beheld thy let vAwsa. 
\v)itt &0*ii appear uxhen. the ilarineSr paJsesr 
-r^>o 1 remauul \vdfi ion. jtittufe in the. 



ra<r<- oP an calc.he rtasr suspended m a, 

vthtch, hunk v)i& trie head, clovanuanl utfxj vie ftecf>: 

7$y deg+eaf nte beheld the iitGtute (UyJsr. ecy 
aar the gavake aP ft Jhununfe cJfy, beneath us? at 04 
immense distance *k*sf ttie vste/t. black 

it tfere &ry -trades? on vjuck revotxJ, vast 
watfUri^ after Aetr Jye^; fMcn &etf or 
'tan in me utntnd* Jeep, tn the. most fa 
refic -shapes' of* animals' ^furanfe aai corruption., 
the ear vtasr full of them* 6c jfeetnJ. c&nbosfedl 
them.; thes^ ne Devilsf. and. awe called,]. 
cf the tur, 1 iww asked jgy eampawan Mck 
eternal let? he staid, lebtotn the Uack &.wlte& 
Bast ncu). foot betoken the Uack &, white 
a clowd and Jure .burst and*tbUed thro the 
blachurife all beneath 30 that tfte ttether deep gnew 
black oar a siea. Broiled *m a t&riUe notsae:l>e~ 
/team us rtasr n0tnin> not* tt> Le, -sken but a Uadc 
tempest, till lookup east iebvee* the clouds &,the\ 
wVatefT. ufe &auv a. cataract at ttooel muaeet wcAfle 
<^*^jn^sfau&ttnrt:fa a* af^earti awt\ 
rttnfc afeaut the 3caiy &UL or a mansfcoug JetfeA 
at las^ fa me east, d&tant about three d&ttegab 

^t Jn ^/f t f&ld tt Jvd& till rteai&coverJk 
tye gAoese rt'cTLtn&atifine.fvBi vJiuJt the >wr\j 
uea anffty in. ej&jfh' uFstnoke,, and no*) we jiaw, t \ 
Jtftui ^Leviathan., lusf Sa^ttead rta* dc 

tcpurpU like- t/ufjgg 
r . i -&*! ***& nwutlt ' 
etheve me sa&inb &un 





/? 

uff 90m tt& me Jury cf*es jpiribugl eKisfbenae * 
r^fjy&and the Axfeet eu/nA'd up &yjtt fusf*s?kfr 
sfto/t. into the mill; J swnaitul alone, dcmentius? 
ctgftearafwe vtosf .no aioF& 9 iut I"Swnd *n#s> zsftfe* 
' nj> on & plea&ai& kmk Jte&ute t river ty tmoon, 
>; hectcinih t fuuper v&e JSUH& to the Tiatp* &t 

ml FTP* I ^* / J>i **** 

ifietne. was?+ Jhe man Mine nette/* euters htsf 
opinion ts' iihs ^fatndinfe vtater, <Sc hreeefa repbls& 

-But I cerasv. and sbufefo fir tke Jtnitl 
there I found wy &*tbeL,who jfurpristed 

mat Hte &Utf t#a& oviirib> t& 

Jtout 

on fTKatik. y ttuwtttijjfit kearit^tt 
novf ute kc&e jse&ioiy eternal 

A B l**&^** 





JiuK tnm? armsr, teSeti d 
' w&wene elevated above. 




into ike toj^aPAe swtjkent I deified, ay&JFif 
vtfo&taJa&in myJiand Srteclenkoxter wtunussf 
fSiuJf man. me ^sjartousf dune, tttuLj*c3teti col me 
vie came, to stetum*Jtew f^taut to ast 
Uapd Info ike Votd+Jkttvteen daburn fc me 



Here staid l! isryour lot, ut 
it map be caUd.So&t vie stax) tke s&ttl& 

churck, 8c I took turn, to the altar *nd 

t% t i / / t ~* ^/ - ** j 

ana jfo'tt **&& & 

Jrivitfe toe Aifepl 
hous'e& ariruJi. *ne ute eittertt; ut tt tfene f& 

JMM 



^ iiS.&i all 0C dtdt gfMVii 

(nfUna, hy tnc jniaaM&tjpri/uiLnfe ana jfnatticntna err 
a/if another, but u'cthful Jy tne nortne& nt their 
chains*; Lcrtever I so* tttat they svntetunesf re*) mi 

ctnd \tidti a brttmtob aspect; fast coup&eL >v/A & then* 
j . / t & i / s? fir* f* i* i +j 

d&ottrti. by buicKtnQ <zr Jtrst one Umb und. then ant* 

thf*r till The jhody *>ftsr left a helpU& trunk, tni* after 

Moura. Ko; aftd -tifire 3$ tkfne. I&a) one sravoitrUy Die- 
ku*& tfte flesh, off* of JUT ovJn. tail; as ike stencn, te/ 
ribly annoyed US' Imth. v)c vlent into the null , SfJ I/L 
aw Jtctniti broufeftt trie, skeleton or a body 9 wKcn in* 
ffue milt rtasr jfctsfotles' Analytics'. ^3S^ J$Er 4L^ 

O^ the Jin^isL jfaijct: thy tJumtatsy tuxy imposed 
upon aie f tnou oufefttest to l>e o&natneot, 

1 omswcrol'. v)e unbasre en. cn& another. 

lost tune, fo comteKre wdn_y0u diose 




. v '-jfi C L~j r'"3^^.'<- '^Svv 

jesk 





-tic 



. auff found tno Attyd& lave the 

to jpeak of tnem&etvesr tig the only wiere; duff &ey 
o with a ccofidefit insolence &ptvutuy &wn gps 

<svt*+. CL**^. ' ,^H. ^. ^^. ^JT.i 



jO i , *j T *-^ * 1 -t *** " 

xv ^wedenbang hoaete mat what he wrctes T 

lic*v ; dw Isf onkr die. Guitents or Index of already 
J>tltsl ! i^l& 

QA man carried a mojnfey about >r a &irt8r tje 
-caiL&e tu was a Idde wisher man, the monkey >&*> 
Vcun , and ccncievd /untselfas' Jiiudt wester man se 
-yen men. . Ik is&o witkSMedentorg; he diewg the 
folly cfcburchesf &c exposes hypocrites ,till he un 
11 are reltyiousf. Azhimselfllte glngle 



_ 22. 

one on earth that ever bwke a net .1 
f~Now hear a plain tart :tSwedenEo7* nasf not wrtt- 
ten one new truth : Mew hear ajwthertne ha& nrithen. 

nil the old _ 

$ And now hear the reasonTRc converged **& 
who are all religious , 6c conversed, not wtuilSe 
all hate religion , itor-he^wcts tnea&avle tfiro' nia 




pv/u 

'me . hut no firtit^r^i^^ ^ ^_ 

now anoiha* fJafn Itzet : Any aian at mernam 
*cal tedaitsf may ffom the wntingp < Paracelsus orJa 
col JjenmeiitfMvtktce ten thousand volumes? efecfuaL* 
value with S>edtttbot*p \ and from those cr Dante cr 
ear an tnfi'nite numoer . /X^?^*^i5M^^ 
when he has JonC "ffus^lef. nun not say mat hi 
icifer than Tttsr mc&ter, r he gnly holds a. can 
Me. ui sunshine . 






artcv 
~* v ^ 1 ^-^ / / 

On/-e I &iw a De>*l ui a Same of {ire, whc arose!* 
an A/i4el tfurt s&t on A chad -and the Devil ut~ 



^^ 

H>onsntp at God 
each. auccof<lina to hisi&eniuy. ana lovuuL we 
^^ ^ - * gnat 






men test, trust who &wy w calumniate 
vac jttett hate &)cf, &r there tsr 00 other Godf\ 

The Angel hearing thigr Aeaame almost Ittiie* 

t ^^ ' f * ^^ //* i # i 

but masfartftg hunsetr Jt<fr&>tfj>eatHiv,&s at lasft 

phjte funk A tfauLng. ancLt/i&i repltetL^^^ 
^Swa Idolater, ia not God 0ne?&s tar not he 
\vtsfible in Jesusf Girtat ?andhasr net Jesus 
wen hi& sanction to 




_ ><? 

}er< Jt&^ Chnst 13 



in 




Jus s&nchon to me lout or ten, caaxauaw 
: aid- he twt awd at 



tiwck the tfaLhamsr {Jed? murder tna&e who were 
fmurderd iecausfe tfliutt ? turn awry me bo* 4m 
,OT<? woman taken in adultery? jstteal me labor of 

ethers? tvjttopbort him? hear -GJ&. wdnds? when. 

he ffttutifd jna/ang a. cjte&tce be&rePtlcde? cewt 

Cr * & & i i ifli 

rtosr tti&cwe& t cuutwhett ne m 
t/tem jJiake efTthe Ji&t aftneir &e ^at 
a&rdiugecLto laJ&e thetrS ] Itetly0t*,n0 
can <srjttsr #ftbu breaktngtke&e ten,commeto 
wasf alt virtue, aactc&faa*m 




. not from rule&. __ 

i lie luutgoafbokenr-.L beheld th* Atgfl H//U* 
Wretched outktsr arms' eaJmactAg me Borne cffirt 

&che uvtsr consiuned andan&e ets EUjah ^XV 

^ ' 





el, \tftw i& nod become a 1 
'j?zs\nr>'~ t ' ** *fl &f**** > 'A*&**"*jJ*TrtJ2M:? 

Ow particular triend : *we owpn read. mt> Ljiuie I 

-gctner ut /sr uacrnalcr auwaucal ser&e >vAt 








2S 





^-i ZP -7 - - 

. ternal JLentale T^rowta,/ it Was 

lieatvl over all tfte 

coasft is' &ick si 
-meruzzn 




trus lakes' antitne rivensr cmd mutter 
me oceatt^Sfrance rentt down. 



JkanJsr sfte. tvcfc tne 




1 8. On tnosfe' tnGnite mountcwus' of l&L 
iwrt barrel out iff/ the odontic &&t, the ru 
born, nre sfoocLJbefore the Starry J&/fe!-j6/ \ 
^.J i taad \tfiut rey orotfd shorty andi tnuft* 
-derousf vi&acfesr me.jealousf H>U\ 

JO. TRe &pecuy hand, turned aloft, ui 

-led rtasr the &&ield,>rth. Went tne 

of jealou&if antan& the amiri&>luur m and 




Jiarltl the Mrtborx. 




.%!J*<r 

ufilook uplO citeeti 



enlarge tky countenance; U J0rt 9 lea&e coun\ 
k/i& cfolaf; return. ID thy oil ana win: O~ \ 



vkc/cti Jiisr 

13. Jhe Jiery lunhsr,me jurnijuife hcur*sii0t\ 
ufteifie &ut&in sun into the utestoyt-sra. ^ 
ufTWalul Jrotn husr eternal deep, die Aoary 
e/ement jvarinb Jieef atfay ; ^ 
ru3ttd JkatuJusr rf 



tne jealousr Jtin; his, l&*y 
lons', tJtundervusr warr const, caridi 
. and due&f*. and 



m vow, 




, . 

utg, rushtng,rtumrife! burtecL ut 
rtunsr, en, Urtlwnasf ^srtar.^C^55~ > '-^ 
* All n^fit beneath the numr, the/t 
tnetr ^fatten. Somes' jacleti emerge munb 




he projnnuttfcctes' Ats ten, 

beamy eyelids? over -the 

' *-*/ 1 I ' ^^^ *&^ r Sf _4-^ 

in dark cu&tnay , Jyx. ^(&,3K 

*i. '^TJ? 7 / ^v^o- 

^ me *ston at lire ut Ju& eastern, 

cloud, mule the jnarninh plumesf her "^pL- 
'deri^&nx&k . jffM^^^^^^^^^ 

tlte clouds? rtrdten. with * 

<&. &tatnbsr the stony~lart to "c?as, 

~* * "% L i ~ - - ^* i *+~*. 



i** u* y - ( f-\ - w^w ns i 

y^^ me iiott Sf 
cea&c. 




Jw 



ui 



ine 



of t/ie 7i<wen. 
Jbladc, wcai twaxsfe 



af/vy. Jfor Ju& ctccepteB &* 

the 



bound 3r ofuld tru* root JVor pale /W/4 
lebenery cauixurt ***&* 
but czc4& net / ^ ~*~ 

that Irvesr 





tkj> cbvutt of Lcutha. o _, 
e the. day o/ thunder? in old tunr. 



beneath, the. rterrui Oak 
, e/u/, .yhaok the. sUdfnit F-arlh 
And thus /LOT jpcffji itrufai Sorih, 



vs on. luy own. trut love 
a. giant race. 



iagvik furious tfu (Lints of desire. 
dvo 'teaven. ty earth., tiwig (Limes 



destruction. &c.plaJtuuis. Jn. tAe mtttst 

a. 
to Hci 



. with, rur.rcs &. jparkLes of fufp 
tht, flames rolL as Lcs- kuriif^ 



C ye/e.*r Covet 
i- \Xunrlid. 



lipd. 

Uc 

Curled, 



up from hig fury 

mounting on fugk 



/I : Jjut CoV&t iVftT pourvd. Tull 
ny fed. rtizA. fat of Lunbr : 
VV/-oi/i fith, IJsinj tore . 

Wantonnt/r luiLJ. lf> sleeh 

Wtdi d- virftnf Lute 
Or SiJxfL Witt ker Lute 

Jdl. Co*et broke. IILS tacks <Sc bars 
slept *rt</i apt* doors ' 

iQ at &e ruA mafLff Feast 
cui- lolLoMki uut and down, 
Qv i UttLe ewe lamb 



fk^/v nothing HKW.' dasfuL viudc 
'fu.'j feet xSarnp the. eh?rnal fierce.- 
/UVKrr or wuL> {lame, they roll rourd- 
And round- on, ail 5ider makinb t/uir tl 
and 



8 fade apart stood tke ures.Lo* rmoina 
Jn the. void keli#e.t!>i fire and fise. 

Jil fremtdjnt, and horror t/iey bthfJd. him. 
<"*/ & i / ' / / L J 

shy sfr<xi> <Mde. apart, di'ivi gr ivf funds 
-And. hjs Feet which the netfitr abyfs 
-Stampd in. fury and, rwt 

Q BiU. no l^i 

Dark 



the fires all 



rot 



otuw Las heoJ~ -MS MI. for Were mfajurd by /us (nces'sant u/ruris 
t>OiU\ci up - Jn th& korrtd vacuity bottomlefs 

into fu^ry spheres irom his- nuy , rrw / / / . , 

Auncs &W4TW U f */J /"vnornLrawbtng: ****** 

first in wrath. threw /us limbs. Uxe tke^r 

babe 

darknefs, ohstrurtian. a. SotjjcL ji^cd born wto auf World. ~\vroth. <5(ibsi.<Le.iL 
t fluctuation, hard. cur adamant. /f,,^ contemplative (Jwitpht* fait arose 
as marble cfEgff* uapef&rvUe'jfai aJJi /us faaai reanL w. tk& /fly& 
und in the. fierce ra.gt/if IrnmortaL /f^ fus cfowward home faUt chariot) cMtotoL. 
d tkc. Scpct-ated fires owe in .^ 

Vast SotuL without ILitJjatUjn. . J.Mary an<& ofgivcuis tdi there grv.W 
BoufuL trt, kiS e^Dandulb dear senses ^ranrjv/fhrm.^ or!>aiuwi& the. ffwnan 

f J*^ n ? ' * ~ 
r<i IT 1/iio tLfute. tnitzxujte weans' 

( C Kctf) : 1 1 

jMk a> *** faU " hore 



TSe' Wt rock 

4nd. tone*, a ^ *# durance 

Inyxtitert, stifi&L. stiffen^, kardned 

^ ->.,, / , / / Q-Baiu.vn itself . tilit/te. Vot>jjrn 

Idl uitae no (#r rouU W 



o eiW.fitV* to r 

7/u.' tenteubgg rent: rent the vnjt Q, ^ faLL ^ tf^ or to. 



. / -"''*. _ vfttsi, ens'c ^g&ns'criitifr the. dire 

With, o- ty&3ri jfrvtn urunjense to unsnense. 

3 (ZrcLclfeL acrols into tuimbtrlefs ktOa- ^ (5>- r , 



o 
r ctuli and 

rL.n>.&jn Kir vent c hea^y 

apart stnmpute Ginws to dust r^ asj'cT^re aJt other pats formes 

a. cloud- 



. 
Me anwvn raMs ay, ^ep beg 



e ean.: fH 

ML cruder, and, horrLble. vacuum Weary $hr*MuJut, 4?inJang 
^en-cntk mm <**, on all sieves round, Jn. a. stifling Mack FiauL ke. 

L 03 flL 



OfL 

reapOvnt heayr down down, fifa, f a ff j ^ fa ^^^ fj^ roots 
limes on, tones, night on ru$hj~, day on <U *$jfa~ & f^ g^ Sf!e i 



r t 

aJJjfig: J n f uru}u g torrents began, 

' on._y ears', <ui<d- a.g^5 on a-gfs 

i ke fell thro tke. void stkii a void v , -^ , . / 

Found tor failing day &. ,aaJi witkouc 4 : fh^i he. sunk-. & arou/rf rus spent LunpS 

cnA. & {Began intricate pipes t)\aorew tr. 

ror lj-u> day or ruajit was: not ttiitr spaces) J&. spa-wit ofcfie waters. Outbrardung 



immense Fdroutf form. stretchy out 6. Or he. OMnrJuL it beneath, m me 5[' 
o ' tkc bottoms ofimmnsitr ragvib &**?&, j , , n 

Inert surveyd (he. cdi bngkt maJs. Ugaun. 

S 



on fa Hoods, fn&i he **** 
wild, dee wan. hu> lernbU ralh. * *ea&, the round. GUe.tfien beat 



SeperatWQ (hg. 

6. 



Tnue 



chaJLTuL Vr6 ui tAar uduute. vtombs 



W the heap J^- dea.*n$ around 

TcLtht fragncnO <f JoluL. up rase 7 ^fc a&es completed thar circles 
\Mc thui.7lein& round the pM Jtrts %g, L ^ ^^ ^ ^ M ma f r a 
jtac fjLorti. Arwus in. the. expanse. ^ .^ 

ii?H utto the Deeps, the Deeps 



rv 



tfwtk HrdJwte ufo* fa dark to 
Deck hone rf 'llrtjvi afpear 
upon the *>wd 

' tiu on urn chain- 
m tke. Deep 



2 yfolcLrtg kit,- fibrtf together 
a form of impregnable. strcn.%tk 
y OLSft&uskd and terrified, oiuif 
umaccs . lit formed on. /font 

A Hwvner or adamant then began. 

iTkje. (nndvig of tyrytn. day and 

roufld (he dafkDfnon 



luuSton 



8- But no kgkt for the C2)p (led. artay 
On. oJJL sttifj' and. left an, unJvrmd? 
Q)ark vacuity here 6 Unxen, Lw 
^ /ierrt wr-mgnty on us bto fl> uife bed 

Q, jUL W ^ta/i in, a rock /k, kuf Jiaart 
In, a. flzshy jiougk formed four n 
the immense Orb of fire 
donn intn r\ight:tilL a Form 
comptfted a. fja/rutn. 
In. darknds and, deep clouds 



LSmy&jM-p bLkhunfrs. the Prophet 
Of Eternity beat on fits iron Links' 



__ - wntute fires' 

Jke light that. Ao>d dam. on th* 

siejd. . beating uvdsvnl condensvig 
- tn. an Orb 



J Jttxu-uita uidtgnont the bn^it sparks' 
fcndurd me vast ffiurunfr but UAH/eOfie 
Los beat on. [ne nnid. till alartouJ 
An. unmetise. Orb OrSrt hjttramd 





..^*-.y,v:.rt^:y!..r?A;3i.x^, : ^,,; J , >Vt ,,^^^<., > , %; .v.-. y ;.,^,, l .,, rt/ ,,, v ,.,^ ? , : >v-.y*f,;* 



ILtEr/tali? spurtui back Jus rfj&ton. 



To unnisf, ycuf aarA vtsnuaru' oF ttrr 




Chap: I 

/ ho, ft yjuu^atv aFjterrar tsTi 
Iti EttsrnaJ UnAnovtn. , 



fftttrg sfiut in, ffie dap;aJl cu>cid 

petriftc tdtgatinaliU 

t ~ - -*"- 



ffatt JarmM, tfas ' a6t>muwl>(& 



- 
It: Uj l/r&i, Btd unktuxvn .ak 



L ui gteaaut <yy stm&A oat 



t 3ectvi~ t tft# chfJl aver Jtui \ZKe c(reaet MtrM. Sc 



. Junes on 'times' Jt* & 




e^fy sjio&e in A& sivi*jt-!tl i/arLnf^.C2fJuuZ &c. tee; foicsy ar terror, 

i, ivsKnQNn. ; tAttfi&Sj aapfarci ?^y/ne fuatfti, unS trutndfji? cf 
t-.^..^ ^issolatf tt'auntajjiy rtn&f, wri-cm? f WVfiafi. me clautt hwjer otvi 
Jjy the UacA wuu^s o ptrturbetLon '^JX 




3.J*ar Ae Strove, tu- battles' tftr 
In arafeen. can/lictianst mt 
Jus 



. . 
Of beast, bifd, sti, serpent &. e/em&a. 



, vapour- and. cloud . 
tn Cueist 



-turn 
ji afetttmc- 



.:JJ. 



:i.Jc,artn. n/ftff ncK. 
&a tftll of di J/n/nartai expanded, 
Or *:ar*Lr<uJ&tJu9 all jfaaite 
Bcaih. 



tHas'Jtat, 



a, -tru 

vuot cfattttff o 
und tJtf dun ref 
atrfjtnty one in 






7o tfte. e/eswrts and rockf Jtr ntn r*.- 
o luile., but f>& could jtetj, 
-% c^jnowj&ur 
Jfg. atitd tfi&n in. 

r f-f t . 



pervufs tn. Kmunfa lire* 

. and age-brato ,an4 abf< .2 
and CM jhatlv>4f at c&aai . J 





In, tftc Homes' of cbtrstaL Jury . 



r > "**?- ^Lr -^^S^t 

Ind a-roat Kast/^tnnc arowuP^T I 
Wtf all&ules Ac Intavt: Ufa a- Htaor^fJ 
Where t/ieu^attdif aTrtvexf in vmnaf\jpf 
blood four c&xtt ik mpurttiuna Zfc aw/ 

dxrnoL fires' beating n>afa " 

-, _ __ <fc catarevctaf d' Ueaci kfrvot Eternal*; ic. Ufa. a. Uack t 
Off tM eferfc. des&rts tfVnyn. ]Me*'J by 3ons tf Etu-rutp.* 
fuvt* JMwr tltrs the. void- tut. all sutcsf \Qtt th* diart of the uJvut* ocean. 
On Urgcns ft/f-tt-fr/ittgn untuesf . \Lifo a. Juanaa, Jicart -*fn'ti'$ & ^eafu^ 
**"' ++**'**+ W^Kf tktSt ttorld of* fjrixna apttfant* 

// -* ^^ 

*o4 round, ttie. dark ofabt< 

rJiJvr Eternal* to canKnt , 

/* t.JAe cbvcitrt. preparation atone / 
rnity jrtixxl mde 



In 



, /vf the stony are. apart Jratn. iAe earth. I/O. JBut UfL^en "**& tn, 3-. -ston 

. rent Jbroat 



( q\Lo&*fvpt howUnfr awut oi* etan 

V Jt^& JDfttrtan ' sftS^fV^Fi <V^V_IW 
/\Tt3. etyjfinfa nuf lot jfor u^ anguuh . 

Ugmn *s rva^ ^^ Ajy ^8*^ ^ 

Slfti i. 



ttfathc&tlJJs vo Jt &r hif $& * 
And t/dznse /tref fir hi& tfaellinfe ,.y 



<5* a. clod of" clay 

' ' l 'I 1 f j It 







in <* esata 3hUiot'. } flirted, *><&i cUreJuL 

I graanutg,' (r\JJ4! (op in, a. 
Till tttt r*ic/un apart *as ^v r ^^f / \^^ff\f^^J^^^ 






H 




j> : I V : meat \A.:Arut LM Iw/ne<) nets! 

f J,a$ smitten tfitfi iisteaus > h~\An tAr&W the /teis roiutd about 
at t 



in. 



2iAru tit te suiting sulphuK.tflhe ^ark charifytf A, bawd. eVery 

%*''.?; ^<^^^''^/?^~&'p-* 

ret-bjtrbed .hnfti&taL mad foQut^Wttk ru?ete of iron &. orafe '; 

ftiK&tfa. <"*.. Jfei ..i (1. tl ^MMife^ _^bu>. I ^.."i, !.... L_ 



is & pitch. & iUi~"K\6.Anfi thefe ttferc the. 
M t/m jtirtausf links afLasi cf 1lri 





OK rjfcs? ntUii over na.a /aJce.tr&, <fc 

X vvhun.'lW/ute as tJiA sncnf on- 



call. 



cfiauta afthe mind, loctuttt up , 



tot 
fent 

Los Mat cat Auf Miters firttn : 
beaOed Jia Sunuuaes & pourtt 
Jtoelar and Sedar of itvJSf 



_ ._ tti* 

5/blL an. tuff rivets' 



' 
The JiQrf&le mbht into 

rf*, --- , tt*^ " m\ 



Sft#sdt& tuntd tfa immoral 



art, huf&nnJJun. 



JtarntU 
the- linked- vtfantat ttiam- ; H* 

writ/tet in. 
vie. winds ; 




And the sAJfhtuvous Sam. swgeutg t/ucJt 



/o 



\ Urix.cn. 

a/ Iu3jft*tr*i Spuut. 



far*/ulij Jroni. tfu 
<S 



52*^ P au 
Jt*o faanf tn. da&e 

btn&cuti fus af&r of 
a 



f 
xtaatr of ar/a/ 



. /ft /iarrc*in ft* 
/ / *o 

rfitf n 

fiaunat tA* ItrivirAtf' f* kue 
O*. 1utJi into two 



jftafc or flej&TutJ 

twmenr ^ruJ 




/2 



0U 
a >aff otdtstotof- 

tnnn&tfr Jttck ; 



/ In tenvrj Las -shrunk vm. v(j 



Juf rttf* Mi>alcl 
/-(utin 



/%~ i^v ** 
hvmer U tnm fus- uuij. 



/tar cvtnndei "7fuvat 
a- red. ficvne CLjffnfut* 
Of" tJurvt , aF % Jttutger 



lAtir -strong vtis it*. 
tuxst* ruutous 
A 



All tilt t*dt,n tc.oy 

bke a. sea, afowut 'Atm. 



ItcJtil took ifuM. 



. 

CLs^cJu^Sram,4tuf ncffnty x<mm*Jn.-Jis cfuuns bcuneLScPi 

" '* 




jt nervettdr st/etue. Jus propbtbc votcftl&r otJfy divides t/u.- 

^ Tj'd i a. a*/ solitude & f/Ofk tffuf.tfjh f'Mg-'S eterntty *** 6f*l 
J&maLffiepAtC <Ss Inywt c^afcf^JLi^c itt catwcts ftoan) ffct 



round &A af'U^fd. r 
LOST juflfjtt Jus nts tt> c/euy \7w4&*% upon *fa> JW^^^""**^ ,t 






Tfius 



J I/r, '<" V' 
OF th* 



/4 



4 i * ' 

or IjHwxIi 
the. etai^i ivttcjtf of L*y . '*l 
e <SMr 




TU/j 
% / 
* 




cut uittf /vatsf; 
&uAb uf>on.tf*s tfindtf: 
at &(<><>&,. stvJk and. tears/; 
eternity a*, eternity 

* avar & 
farm, tretitb 

&eone JuJs cbathy jfuu& 



pJ&nate 
as a, do 

Ignare &u& Joot 



the eternal ntyruuts 
Kmalp form not* 





t&c /nffvn by o* tttr 
ii*ht' t&r/itrt htC vofnb 
e, \vorm la nit itrrw fc n . ^r- 



i-rocOexl lare at/lew round (Ati Hul 
stnvOL 

WtJSl (fJuUU ffiS'c.u- tftc 



<fSmjf of ffyh t>i 



forth an. Jn-fa 




CAa/ - VI . 0* 

1 But Lax so.* t/if PefliaJ* . 
7ft: cmkrofH Aer. sfte Wept jfm 
Ix perverse an*( cruel delt&ht 
ficoi tram. Ju^ artns.yecn* 



__rzi> /uf ft- 

f ~f <& TSif*^ */"*"" 

'n AJS ox>n, dtsuLxt tm 



3yf 

felt at. Worm *vtA<a far 

4 Yft AfJfldr it Up tttte a 
In Ctlf. tfCfnJfli/tg )ro/+tj> i__ 
To be mauldct/ 




/or? JcttctncLts t-<Aj'tct ifi* *.** 
- Acae </*m. Cfu sbJuxtAc cords' 



/ 

Jf. In. Aur AjmUs fa s*e 
e AaaSfaee/ Aon tn. 
nun. tn 



*\ }- JF/e JSrmel a. &ne Ac. 

f~m 'i y f -y tff y^ > 

ouvtde tne sfliyJf 
Joj-'iui a. Jivtduia 

,,~v '^ J '**jp*^ l ^'*T^^p rl- i t 

fvrmcJ stales tx> i 



. , 

e ottryft t&f jztealtc tn 
.Bitf: ^titf afiorn 

-w^r*/ hijs bovom. , I 
n he Aur&t tt~ 
fiff' strolls Jiu 
f gts-tRe t^fiLf /arm*/ j[y 
J3y nfejit ttftf hunzt in. 

*^/ _^ *^ mi t , BB 

itiese /atRriktttnm 

an 



a, &rt{jfert, 
med holdtn 




in eatA otAar 
4 Thgr teak 



ti* 

tfie toy? at u 



c^ut/toi fas' younf UmtiS (xrdtff\^/iytinfajtn 




bam 



1 Ur 2.-ii d vji/ f 

Of Id* an. A*y &r*cJ<4n jrtpunJtun.y Grodno- rent ihf deep rartA. ha*itu\g 

' >J .ALS foavens tmrf.me. era L ~ 

---. -._ .-p. _ _ ,. _ fa gfiuM pnrtftl wti/i htat; 

htg/ttiuniB : faitltleff /a*/u/t - s r' f^** fay**- s 
T'orutns' oT U/i. jruTvUttus/** 'f .: /'f*mti oitt Gnst begotten last 
Of . Joot. or 4 kaneL or a. JumaL ^U^ At*' eternal *sons in &A<: nta^ 
Or f 7eart. or an yf . tfafy*s*/om t*LS .Jlty dauglkun; fwn f^roen. Jwt)>- A. cattle 

"V<^-Y-' Frw irwrt*ttrv. <*- vtttfyns oT 'tfa> pit 
blaod \ -" - -ea^ 

He in- elvkndx closet, vatvU ail Xu 
to JMX T* ' . r<ux -..'-._- - 

rind /US' soul jtukcnd .' fie. curs a 

I t I * f L 

a -fri'is . i&jHghtfi-^- for he you* 
no flesh nor jptu-ie ccuLct ke*p 

trim. 

*. mart from, a ciud (vrn.tc. -_ w , 

frtvn ttie wajfr.<f e>erg"* teunfttts 1 . ' /O. far Af sa*t that /nfe Lxd uou 



_ 
trrTorr:J*l*Jbktutf* 

~ 



tlntnaL rftuUansr affttar 

pffarrtrv on. 
ftrst"TJtinl 



Wee/Hug 

Aztoiusfid or 



m 



i 




vg at tAe Vtttgy tfoor 



fliseaJKisf an taFmenQ? \ 

Lt. tnroA&vt&ff &e- 

^Ihso'alL (Ae coastf; *** **-***. ~ 

w 

Beneath. Uie. dork, net 



Hetfmi* &. otun- 4& 
tmw-Cvtr kt Wandfd 
Upon, tftf 



, ^-^. -^_ . 
2 IdL t&t. *A'iraAut grf* clmoteo! ever 



)uxtrnJ Mat- Me M4V9K 




Drawing out ff-cm Jtut ^orrvt*/ 
Jne (uuigeon-UJd Jtea^en. elufult. 
Where ever the. footsteps eFUrgt 
er Me. aUifjr in. sv/mn*. 



I BfU t/U ytreetfy sltnu. tn. fAarXenvus 
BrvntftttogS* 



J.JLU. a.Wekel*k*.oe>Utkv ! ybt*al 
DIM tormented, element JtirctcAit 
front tnc &orro*iy or L/j'LXtas' jauL 
~n.nct tAen& AS a. fe*uJTvt, eniaru, 
-A/an* (ouiii^vak tAf7A&, no w.g: 
_-- ^ . / ^E/>; -^^^j*-^ * ^u* 




mesAcy; t#i*t*l. Use to 
Auman. brtun. 



Of yrytn. feet abttur 



te tftveidh 

Ajf&l the -s 



^/- durty cities' Avuleti 

*tn or a. humtvi Mart 





of Kelt \Jn tfie. in&ut* vouL.ltut tvtvut et 



trs n<t ttiftreyzs tM- MC 
jfuur tfO/tren of other 



net the/ fc/C ttui 



6 And tttc Jw1y cure.* muixyu/ , 

6? W* A>* 
: t& j***\e tiftuf mot. 



7 TXe svntawutg} jgonf or /?<** 
ReAebS- tJtair 6rtzfirw sts"" 
BencatH tfu,_/Vff of C/^rw 

,-^ 



' * v i ; >' t 
& it. \ \i\ \\v& 



vmm 






mm ; 




BOOK of 

AHANIA 



X, 




//y 




/ Fla 



m en a, chanoC tron.-l 
te) (U* n*.- ha k(* 
iiruw*'. spoil* k# J*r 



truiirj. Ae Cold. 

-ttr'cL 

Sut (he jir&yt T* Ait jeit tt. n*n/m-- 
berun.. Lauf-'unfi tt tore 



. ehanft 

fuJ rigfu luuid Sums red. m its' 




, . 
TJ* aU. Ions d L/rijen 



f: Dire dmtket kf uu**<Mi Lust 

n><nJ. liny*.! Jtete/*a$ lu uM. HarJ 
Aw parted 






iff Vo/irf eW ^Ubvt ef smoke 



< t an *Mterf 

fun, no* obycuni Aii^ of farrow 



3; St At* ^o/e 01 a /Gr 
On. n Un}n iroYttuAg indignant 
QMe. of wrat*. vhaluy 
' 



. . 

vig >iiJi &n . ~f\& 
ko*>!ui Clobr bi 



He groaatL a^usU mttei w Sut., 
Jfi&utit Aer and rvepfift over her 

/tv/ her n d<ulw .in sduve 
' sit* was invisible . 

She. fell dcn A Gu*t jhvla* *vdr<n 
Jn, chaos? and. ctrciiAjk dark, llnjen. . 
yf-T the. moan anf^usKa- ardef the earn, 
J&p'lfh.'ijii/ujcrd.! a Jjeaths- sfi&Jff* '. 
Ttn.reen . unbodied. . 
jke mathfr 



#.: Uf>posdL to the glutting ScuneL of 
'The broad Dufk ofltryen. tp 
Acro/r t^s Motd may a We 



fae i -(if rr heart, 

AS" a pUiar -jf hrr to i$yp 
JGi/e fonalrecL jtarf vtundrwt on. earth, 
TtJl Lo* Juyd a and. beat at et ma/s 



S:Jt 



. Un 



du. 









1: &ut the. 
And. huf eyeg 



Vri.^fH d&ui by fusr 
God. saiA. fm eute.it of things '. 



#di anju&h. fuy bpf lu {(Lcn, suy* die Kck. s$Wf 
u c f 1 /^"D an "^ oucer Q^ Jki.JO't fvMl enim'd nusf ooom- . 
ke pepard Jus Bo*> gfa ^^Sl Mts ^ 6 . fus treef 

^Tkat ftcute. ii^it to the jnarnutfeif <a heaven 

.f jails'.- tkat in- h& <tark galcfaoz Were 'Snutifn- vliih darKriefs'. defpfjia, 
obgcurcL en lisf Ar-ester feLt ,nangtnsf AiuL oubtrrfxhA, on tile ictfi* (ftke Ja- 
for lu dire QoflJtwf>laiions -tftt 

cLwn .LJcc floods ffcao. tut mountains' (5jx , , , _ . 

a mud saU/.wJ> tAu-A, W.JJut the rock. hlLufyn, the. Earth,. 

" Mount &uuu ur. 



^ 

With B fetes of unnajtufOl 
fortJuvSkfiatc/uiid. some httlfi on /u> 
Same in, vales'; 



3. Qt thcxe cut tnannous 1 atreeuL 
Scaled and poi"sffnou& horned. 
Approach^. Itft^en, even, to 
CLs ke -fat an. fas' dark, rooted Oak.. 



Ckap HI 
L'jJUf. Globe, jk-tok. and Ijrtje 



en, seatadL 

On, lAafk. douJd tug 3Qre wound iitKnbd, 
ointment _{l/>\ti<L do\i)n. on, tka vaiai 

with. A(W, kere the. &nake gets' 
her potion, 



fius Twins he. pu#luL Jw-ujuji. TLWdk. di&fubif & great f>am,, 
Great the conflict 3f great (Ae.jeaUtusy Lifiect on h&k the. dead cafse. 
Jn. cclal jtoufonj: but; urg&t JmeCe him^ On, hLsf sfAouMerg' A-e hare tit' to W 

A. Tree huftb aotr the Immensity 

Si Jisst he j}<x.mn'J the racks uktk. /its' A/W rr / o/ j L 

3. for *ken. Orym. shrunk axw 

Sfffm. tta-nedf. ne 3t on. a. roc/C 
Barren,: u, rock which, himsfdf -. 



Thai poksh,d ft 

Dned. tajid them, apart till . 

! a.J?e black prepard, on. t)u? Bow 
.opened rock, pl/icd in. gdettce 

utixrd. t}u>sK wdi to ~the -Bo* 



<:OBc 



ovt (f the doud* of secre-sy 
nerve 



from. redaunJtnfe ande3 had vetnnee 
Mary tears &IL on. the rock, 

Ooonsnat the pained root 
s\r ?vf . 1 1 A.-_ L^.J 



<fffU clAuMorsecrtsr Of My&try Mr hut UL: 

of that Lot .&md nwKSter $.tsi?*j3itr* i he. roU. 

ff rock #&. ***u* *_ fn egr ^ bog k j , ron _ 



aw. Jprunjj to many a tree. 



. 
*J/ie, black douds , on. tlu bo&>n of Sujcn ,~y ^ horrid c/ari bendix its 

Grc*t to rooty when it &tc the 
"7: Su fftyutk. In torm&tt of kui nfon 
3e. bent me. enarnutus' ribf stilly: 

Jl arJe aC darltnef?' that, &*< 4/ff*ajd ^PrOeeL^^ai^ 

Jhe. 3WJV in. it> rest: then, thtRoat gK beheld, himself compafeed Tound 
tyotfonoui' source.' l^itd **ih. -irk, !>&& dtf- Jfad fagk ro af<>d over #tjft bveff 
-fpJt , . fa aro ^t f^ the. stuns- Jtood SO thick 

Jet **&_y Wfe: -siltnt tinAlp ^ ^ j t &J &i W &* 

Brout hi* Bboky alt. but e, 



Of 



Of iron /ram tAe 



stdlt'-aylf <w the VouL 



y. /tvusui the fjle faufi vofse en tfie 



O Jiu. coKse oT his first 
the. tucurseJL "Tre*. o 
fi (J\i. topmost stem 

icii nudcL^Jnons corse 



IV. 



t- forth fw> the arrows at pesfiLmct 
&xu'.d. the pale U** (vrse at die tree 



the 



and. terror and. wot. 
'itli his dusmai ord 
'Jjyrls veors. <ilL fus sour it, 
Kit iJieir <SNjJLr harden, then. Asia. 
tn tfie pendulous d*ef> 

refrtlije upon- t/ie 
n jyvojid on. 
Gltap V 




0\w the disorganffd /f w *? rflr j T Of Non-entj&.kc* 

Titt petri/ic paifl Scurfd oer the, Lakes Sfcrbmen. Ahatua and. tket. .' 

(Is the bones- of man., niui Ac <tark 

3. -J la. on. tke ixrge of the deep 
I fee tfy dark cSnaLr ascend . 
1 3se tfy black, iorests auL Hoods 
A tioiTMe. waste, to *y eyes' 



at disease, koteftt >uic 
ne Immortal, in. tniticnt 

u\t '>urtun& botusf 



djudst tfwtt desjxse 
zttst me Jrwt tfy bright presence 
tfie. World- afZa 
. Jielzf of iron. cuvuruL 
thre* them. .muuL fa. ***/**!* 

pr weep on. his ntes nor 



> 
So 



tor enuvte and, 
on Ae tormented 
any ofAarsafV. 



saund -' 

JCOMOC h.sy the 
Wureon. /uf t>n/>t feet hw* trod.. 



Bat 



J wander on tfie 
necessity. 



6: Mere, is my golden paicux 
PVfierp. nw . IMOIV bed 
\fl\ere thejoy cjr m*- r 
TVnzrt tftf'&ons' & 



hour 
wging 



%*&* 'forth ,_ 
Cm- toe virgins of 
~ die 



j?enero,ts< ire 
5 



my 

af(.y& to &\e mountain, sport 
tfve. bWls of eternal valleys'. 




/v ^ 

'*/ Jne. svteac 
73 Akama. ret 



On. the hre 

From, fry jroft clowd. or d&rf to faiL 

In. showers' of Ue on. (vaf 



. ke tiaye. my floppy >sW 
ij r+i <^%s 
. tfic sons' or etermCioy 

"ft/far* ke took thf daugvbers' of Itfi. 
Into iy cdaanberff . oF lave . 

10: W>4n I found babes' of ttiss. on ny beds, 
vrfjrd. bas'o'nj' ofmilL in / 
FiUxL rt'Jtk eLsr-neJL <*eed~ 
0' eternal births' 5iut V>0~~ _ 
Jn. inter change sweet or their 



. 

retdrwL tn. eveninti 
moisture. axiaJce to birth 
mottuKyys'. jfLeeping m 



/4; But now alone 
Cjost out iron tty toaely bofont. 
Crttfl tfoioosy '^elfi'sK fear'. 
jeL-'a*st>m-ing koy ca/i 
Jleruutf isi Viesc ctuuns aT 

re bones at beastf are 

tne bleak, and snowy mo 

bon&f from tkeoist/t. ate. buried. 



11: $v/elL<L tfddi 

on M>tA 
ripe ft^s 1 and rick, pomegranates. 




TIEIEL. 



TIEIEL. 

i. 

And aged Tiriel stood before the gates of his beautiful palace, 
"With Myratana, once the Queen of all the western plains ; 
But now his eyes were dai'kened, and his wife fading in death 
They stood before their once delightful palace ; and thus the voice 
Of aged Tiriel arose, that his sons might hear in their gates. 

" Accursed race of Tiriel ! Behold your father ; 
Come forth and look on her that bore you. Come, you accursed sons. 
In my weak arms I here have borne your dying mother ; 
Come forth, sons of the curse, come forth ! See the death of 
Myratana." 

His sons ran from their gates, and saw their aged parents stand : 
And thus the eldest son of Tiriel raised his mighty voice : 

" Old man ! unworthy to be called the father of Tiriel's race ! 
For every one of those thy wrinkles, each of those grey hairs, 
Are cruel as death, and as obdurate as the devouring pit ! 
Why should thy sons care for thy curses, thou accursed man ? 
Were we not slaves till we rebelled ? Who cares for Tiriel's curse ? 
His blessing was a cruel curse ; his curse may be a blessing." 

He ceased. The aged man raised up his right hand to the heavens ; 

His left supported Myratana, shrinking in pangs of death. 

The orbs of his large eyes he opened, and thus his voice went forth : 

" Serpents, not sons, wreathing around the bones of Tiriel ! 
Ye worms of death, feasting upon your aged parents' flesh. 



4 TIRIKL. 

Listen, and hear your mother's groans. No more accursed sons 

She bears ; she groans not at the birth of Heuxos or Yuva. 

These are the groans of death, ye serpents ! these are the groans of 

death ! 
Nourished with milk, ye serpents, nourished with mother's tears and 

cares ! 

Look at my eyes, blind as the orbless skull among the stones ; 
Look at my bald head. Hark, listen, ye serpents, listen ! . . . . 
What, Myratana ! What, my wife ! soul ! spirit ! O fire ! 
What, Myratana, art thou dead ? Look here, ye serpents, look ! 
The serpents sprung from her own bowels have drained her dry as 

this. 
Curse on your ruthless heads, for I will bury her even here ! " 

So saying, he began to dig a grave with his aged hands : 
But Heuxos called a son of Zazel to dig their mother a grave. 

" Old cruelty, desist, and let us dig a grave for thee. 

Thou hast refused our charity, thou hast refused our food, 

Thou hast refused our clothes, our beds, our houses for thy dwelling, 

Choosing to wander like a son of Zazel in the rocks. 

Why dost thou curse ? Is not the curse now come upon thine head ? 

Was it not thou enslaved the sons of Zazel ? And they have cursed, 

And now thou feel'st it ! Dig a grave, and let us bury our mother." 

" There, take the body, cursed sons! And may the heavens rain 

wrath, 

As thick as northern fogs, around your gates, to choke you up ! 
That you may lie as now your mother lies like dogs, cast out, 
The stink of your dead carcases annoying man and beast, 
Till your white bones are bleached with age for a memorial. 
No ! your remembrance shall perish ; for, when your carcases 
Lie stinking on the earth, the buriers shall arise from the East, 
And not a bone of all the sons of Tiriel remain. 
Bury your mother, but you cannot bury the curse of Tiriel." 

He ceased, and darkling o'er the mountains sought his pathless way. 




TIRIEL. - 5 

II. 

He wandered day and night. To him. hoth day and night were dark : 
The sun he felt, but the bright moon was now a useless globe. 
O'er mountains and through vales of woe the blind and aged man 
Wandered, till He that leadeth all led him to the vales of Har. 

And Har and Heva, like two children, sat beneath the oak. 

Mnetha, now aged, waited on them, and brought them food and 

clothing. 

But they were as the shadow of Har, and as the years forgotten ; 
Playing with Sowers and running after birds they spent the day, 
And in the night like infants slept, delighted with infant dreams. 

Soon as the blind wanderer entered the pleasant gardens of Har, 
They ran weeping, like frightened infants, for refuge in Mnetha's 

arms. 

The blind man felt his way, and cried : " Peace to these open doors ! 
Let no one fear, for poor blind Tiriel hurts none but himself. 
Tell me, O friends, where am I now, and in what pleasant place ? " 

" This is the valley of Har," said Mnetha, " and this is the tent of 

Har. 
Who art thou, poor blind man, that takest the name of Tiriel on 

thee? 

Tiriel is King of all the West. Who art thou ? I am Mnetha ; 
And this is Har and Heva, trembling like infants by my side." 

" I know Tiriel is King of the West, and there he lives in joy. 
No matter who I am, Mnetha ! If thou hast any food, 
Give it me, for I cannot stay my journey is far from hence." 

Then Har said : " my mother Mnetha ; venture not so near him, 
For he is the king of rotten wood, and of the bones of death ; 
He wanders without eyes, and passes through thick walls and doors. 
Thou shalt not smite my mother Mnetha, thou eyeless man ! " 



5 TlRlEL. 

" A wanderer, I beg for food. You see I cannot weep. 
I cast away my staff, the kind companion of my travel, 
And I kneel down that you may see I am a harmless man." 

He kneeled down. And Mnetha said : " Come, Har and Heva, rise 
He is an innocent old man, and hungry with his travel." 

Then Har arose, and laid his hand upon old Tiriel's head. 

" God bless thy poor bald pate, God bless thy hollow winking eyes, 
God bless thy shrivelled beard, God bless thy many- wrinkled fore- 
head ! 

Thou hast no teeth, old man ! and thus I kiss thy sleek bald head. 
Heva, come, kiss his bald head, for he will not hurt us, Heva." 

Then Heva came, and took old Tiriel in her mother's arras. 

" Bless thy poor eyes, old man, and bless the old father of Tiriel ! 
Thou art my Tiriel's old father ; I know thee through thy wrinkles, 
Because thou smellest like the fig-tree, thou smellest like ripe figs. 
How didst thou lose thy eyes, old Tiriel ? Bless thy wrinkled face ! " 

Mnetha said : " Come in, aged wanderer ; tell us of thy name. 
Why shouldest thou conceal thyself from those of thine own flesh ? 

" I am not of this region," said Tiriel, dissemblingly. 

" I am an aged wanderer, once father of a race 

Far in the North ; but they were wicked, and were all destroyed, 

And I their father sent an outcast. I have told you all : 

Ask me no more, I pray, for grief hath sealed my precious sight." 

" Lord ! " said Mnetha, " how I tremble ! Are there then more 

people, 
More human creatures on this earth, beside the sons of Har ? " 

" No more," said Tiriel, " but I, remain on all this globe ; 
And I remain an outcast. Hast thou anything to drink ? " 

Then Mnetha gave him milk and fruits, and they sat down together. 



TIKIEL. 



III. 

They sat and ate, and Har and Heva smiled on Tiriel. 

" Thou art a very old old man, but I am older than thou. 

How came thine hair to leave thy forehead, how came thy face so 

brown ? 

My hair is very long, my beard doth cover all my breast. 
God bless thy piteous face ! To count the wrinkles in thy face 
Would puzzle Mnetha. Bless thy face, for thou art Tiriel ! " 

" Tiriel I never saw but once. I sat with him and ate ; 
He was as cheerful as a prince, and gave me entertainment. 
But long I stayed not at his palace, for I am forced to wander." 

" What ! wilt thou leave us too ? " said Heva. " Thou shalt not leave 

us too, 

For we have many sports to show thee, and many songs to sing ; 
And after dinner we will walk into the cage of Har, 
And thou shalt help us to catch birds, and gather them ripe cherries ; 
Then let thy name be Tiriel, and never leave us more." 

" If thou dost go," said Har, " I wish thine eyes may see thy folly. 
My sons have left me. Did thine leave thee? Oh 'twas very 
cruel ! " 

" No, venerable man," said Tiriel, " ask me not such things, 

For thou dost make my heart to bleed. My sons were not like 

thine, 
But worse. Oh never ask me more, or I must flee away." 

" Thou shalt not go," said Heva, "till thou hast seen our singing- birds, 
And heard Har sing in the great cage, and slept upon our fleeces. 
Go not, for thou art so like Tiriel that I love thine head, 
Though it is wrinkled like the earth parched with the summer heat." 



Then TirieL rose up from the seat, and said : " God bless these 

tents ! 

My journey is o'er rocks and mountains, not in pleasant vales ; 
I must not sleep nor rest, because of madness and dismay." 

And Mnetha said : " Thou must not go to wander dark alone, 
But dwell with us, and let us be to thee instead of eyes, 
And I will bring thee food, old man, till death shall call thee 
hence." 

Then Tiriel frowned, and answered : " Did I not command you 

saying 

Madness and deep dismay possess the heart of the blind man, 
The wanderer who seeks the woods, leaning upon his staff ? " 

Then Mnetha, trembling at his frowns, led him to the tent-door, 
And gave to him his staff, and blessed him. He went on his way. 

But Har and Heva stood and watched hirn till he entered the wood; 
And then they went and wept to Mnetha, but they soon forgot their 
tears. 

IV. 

Over the weary hills the blind man took his lonely way ; 
To him the day and night alike was dark and desolate. 
But far he had not gone when Ijim from his woods came down, 
Met him at entrance of the forest, in a dark and lonely way. 

" Who art thou, eyeless wretch, that thus obstructest the lion's 

path P 

Ijim shall rend thy feeble joints, thou tempter of dark Ijim ! 
Thou hast the form of Tiriel, but I know thee well enough ! 
Stand from my path, foul fiend ! Is this the last of thy deceits 
To be a hypocrite, and stand in shape of a blind beggar ? " 

The blind man heard his brother's voice, and kneeled down on his 
knee. 







TIRIEL. 9 

"O'brother Ijim, if it is thy voice that speaks to me, 
Smite not thy brother Tiriel, though weary of his life. 
My sons have smitten me already ; and, if thou smitest me, 
The curse that rolls over their heads will rest itself on thine. 
'Tis now seven years since in my palace I beheld thy face." 

" Come, thou dark fiend, I dare thy cunning ! know that Ijim scorns 
To smite thee in the form of helpless age and eyeless policy ; 
Rise up, for I discern thee, and I dare thy eloquent tongue. 
Come, I will lead thee on thy way, and use thee as a scoff." 

" brother Ijim, thou beholdest wretched Tiriel : 

Kiss me, my brother, and then leave me to wander desolate ! " 

" No, artful fiend, but I will lead thee ; dost thou want to go ? 
Reply not, lest I bind thee with the green flags of the brook ; 
Ay, now thou art discovered. I will use thee like a slave." 

When Tiriel heard the words of Ijim, he sought not to reply : 
He knew 'twas vain, for Ijim's words were as the voice of Fate. 

And they went on together, over hills, through woody dales, 
Blind to the pleasures of the sight, and deaf to warbling birds. 

All day they walked, and all the night beneath the pleasant moon, 
Westwardly journeying, till Tiriel grew weary with his travel. 

" Ijim, I am faint and weary, for my knees forbid 

To bear me further. Urge me not, lest I should die with travel. 

A little rest I crave, a little water from a brook, 

Or I shall soon discover that I am a mortal man, 

And thou wilt lose thy once-loved Tiriel. Alas ! how faint I am !" 

" Impudent fiend ! " said Ijim, " hold thy glib and eloquent 

tongue ; 

Tiriel is a king, and thou the tempter of dark Ijim. 
Drink of this running brook, and I will bear thee on my shoulders." 



10 TtRIEL. 

He drank ; and Ijim raised him up, and bore him on his shoulders. 
All day he bore him ; and, when evening drew her solemn curtain, 
Entered the gates of Tiriel's palace, and stood and called aloud. 

" Heuxos, come forth ! I here have brought the fiend that troubles 

Ijim. 
Look ! know'st thou aught of this grey beard, or of these blinded 

eyes ? " 

Heuxos and Lotho ran forth at the sound of Ijim's voice, 

And saw their aged father borne upon his mighty shoulders. 

Their eloquent tongues were dumb, and sweat stood on their trembling 

limbs ; 
They knew 'twas vain to strive with Ijim. They bowed and silent 

stood. 

" What, Heuxos ! call thy father, for I mean to sport to-night. 

This is the hypocrite that sometimes roars a dreadful lion ; 

Then I have rent his limbs, and left him rotting in the forest 

For birds to eat. But I have scarce departed from the place, 

But like a tiger he would come, and so I rent him too. 

Then like a river he would seek to drown me in his waves, 

But soon I buffeted the torrent; anon like to a cloud 

Fraught with the swords of lightning, but I braved the vengeance 

'too. 

Then he would creep like a bright serpent, till around my neck 
"While I was sleeping he would twine : I squeezed his poisonous soul. 
Then like a toad or like a newt would whisper in my ears ; 
Or like a rock stood in my way, or like a poisonous shrub. 

At last I caught him in the form of Tiriel blind and old, 

And so I'll keep him. Fetch your father, fetch forth Myratana." 

They stood confounded, aad thus Tiriel raised his silver voice. 

" Serpents, not sons, why do you stand ? Fetch hither Tiriel, 
Fetch hither Myratana, and delight yourselves with scoffs ; 
For poor blind Tiriel is returned, and this much -injured head 
Is ready for your bitter taunts. Come forth, sons of the curse ! " 



TlttfEL, 11 

Meantime the other sons of Tiriel ran around their father, 
Confounded at the terrible strength of Ijina. They knew 'twas vain, 
Both spear and shield were useless, and the coat of iron mail, 
When Ijim stretched his mighty arm ; the arrow from his limbs 
Rebounded, and the piercing sword broke on his naked flesh. 

" Then is it true, Heuxos, that thou has turned thy aged parent 

To be the sport of wintry winds," said Ijim : " is this true ? 

It is a lie, and I am like the tree torn by the wind, 

Thou eyeless fiend and you dissemblers ! Is this Tiriel's house ? 

It is as false as Matha, and as dark as vacant Orcus. 

Escape, ye fiends, for Ijim will not lift his hand against ye." 

So saying, Ijim gloomy turned his back, and silent sought 
The secret forests, and all night wandered in desolate ways. 



V. 

And aged Tiriel stood and said : " Where does the thunder sleep ? 
Where doth he hide his terrible head ? and his swift and fiery 

daughters, 
Where do they shroud their fiery wings, and the terrors of their 

hair ? 
Earth, thus I stamp thy bosom ! rouse the earthquake from his 

den, 

To raise his dark and burning visage through the cleaving ground, 
To thrust these towers with his shoulders ! Let his fiery dogs 
Rise from the centre, belching flames and roaring dark smoke ! 
Where art thou, Pestilence, that bathest in fogs and standing lakes ? 
Raise up thy sluggish limbs, and let the loathsomest of poisons 
Drop from thy garments as thou walkest, wrapped in yellow clouds ! 
Here take thy seat in this wide court ; let it be strewn with dead ; 
And sit and smile upon these cursed sons of Tiriel ! 
Thunder, and fire, and pestilence, hear you not Tiriel's curse ?" 



12 , TlBIBt. 

He ceased. The heavy clouds confused rolled round the lofty 

towers, 

Discharging their enormous voices at the father's curse. 
The earth trembled, fires belched from the yawning clefts, 
And, when the shaking ceased, a fog possessed the accursed clime. 
The cry was great in Tiriel's palace. His five daughters ran, 
And caught him by the garments, weeping with cries of bitter woe. 
" Ay, now you feel the curse, you cry ! but may all ears be deaf 
As Tiriel's, and all eyes as blind as Tiriel's, to your woes ! 
May never stars shine on your roofs, may never sun nor moon 
Visit you, but eternal fogs hover around your walls ! 
Hela, my youngest daughter, thou shalt lead me from this place ; 
And let the curse fall on the rest, and wrap them up together ! " 
He ceased, and Hela led her father from the noisome place. 
In haste they fled, while all the sons and daughters of Tiriel, 
Chained in thick darkness, uttered cries of mourning all the night. 
And in the morning, lo ! au hundred men in ghastly death, 
The four daughters, stretched on the marble pavement, silent, all 
Fallen by the pestilence, the rest moped round in guilty fears ; 
And all the children in their beds were cut off in one night. 
Thirty of Tiriel's sons remained, to wither in the palace 
Desolate, loathed, dumb, astonished waiting for black death. 



VI. 

And Hela led her father through the silence of the night, 

Astonished, silent, till the morning beams began to spring. 

" Now, Hela, I can go with pleasure, and dwell with Har and Heva 

Now that the curse shall clean devour all those guilty sons. 

This is the right and ready way ; I know it by the sound 

That our feet make. Eemember, Hela, I have saved thee from 

death ; 

Then be obedient to thy father, for the curse is taken off thee. 
I dwelt with Myratana five years in the desolate rock ; 



TIRIEL. 13 

And all that time we waited for the fire to fall from heaven, 
Or for the torrents of the sea to overwhelm you all. 
But now my wife is dead, and all the time of grace is past. 
You see the parents' curse. Now lead me where I have com- 
manded." 

" leagued with evil spirits, thou accursed man of sin 

True, I was born thy slave. Who asked thee to save me from death ? 

'Twas for thyself, thou cruel man, because thou wantest eyes." 

" True, Hela, this is the desert of all those cruel ones. 

Is Tiriel cruel ? Look ! his daughter and his youngest daughter 

Laughs at affection, glories in rebellion, scoffs at love. 

I have not ate these two days ; lead me to Har and Heva's tent, 

Or I will wrap thee up in such a terrible father's curse 

That thou shalt feel worms in thy marrow creeping through thy 

bones ; 
Yet thou shalt lead me. Lead me, I command, to Har and Heva." 

" cruel ! destroyer ! consumer ! avenger ! 

To Har and Heva I will lead thee ; then would that they would 

curse 
Then would they curse as thou hast cursed ! But they are not like 

thee! 

Oh they are holy and forgiving, filled with loving mercy, 
Forgetting the offences of their most rebellious children, 
Or else thou wouldest not have lived to curse thy helpless children. 

" Look on my eyes, Hela, and see (for thou hast eyes to see) 
The tears swell from my stony fountains ; wherefore do I weep ? 
Wherefore from my blind orbs art thou not seized with poisonous 

stings ? 

Laugh, serpent, youngest venomous reptile of the flesh of Tiriel ! 
Laugh, for thy father Tiriel shall give thee cause to laugh, 
Unless thou lead me to the tent of Har, child of the curse ! " 



14 TIRIEL. 

" Silence thy evil tongue, thou murderer of thy helpless children. 

I lead thee to the tent of Har : not that I mind thy curse, 

But that I feel they will curse thee, and hang upon thy bones 

Fell shaking agonies, and in each wrinkle of that face 

Plant worms of death to feast upon the tongue of terrible curses ! " 

" Hela, my daughter, listen ! Thou art the daughter of Tiriel. 
Thy father calls. Thy father lifts his hand unto the heavens, 
For thon hast laughed at my tears, and cursed thy aged father : 
Let snakes rise from thy bedded locks, and laugh among thy curls ! " 

He ceased. Her dark hair upright stood, while snakes infolded round 
Her madding brows : her shrieks appalled the soul of Tiriel. 

"What have I done, Hela, my daughter? Fear'st thou now the 

curse, 

Or wherefore dost thou cry ? Ah wretch, to curse thy aged father ! 
Lead me to Har and Heva, and the curse of Tiriel 
Shall fail. If thou refuse, howl in the desolate mountains." 



VII. 

She, howling, led him over mountains and through frighted vales, 
Till to the caves of Zazel they approached at eventide. 

Forth from their caves old Zazel and his sons ran, when they saw 
Their tyrant prince blind, and his daughter howling and leading him. 

They laughed and mocked ; some threw dirt and stones as they 

passed by. 

But, when Tiriel turned around and raised his awful voice, 
Some fled away ; but Zazel stood still, and thus began : 

" Bald tyrant, wrinkled cunning, listen to Zazel's chains ; 

'Twas thou that chained thy brother Zazel ! Where are now thine 

eyes ? 
Shout, beautiful daughter of Tiriel ; thou singest a sweet song ! 



TIEIEL, 15 

Where are you going ? Come and eat some roots, and drink some 

water. 

Thy crown is bald, old man ; the sun will dry thy brains away, 
And thou wilt be as foolish as thy foolish brother Zazel," 

The blind man heard, and smote his breast, and trembling passed on, 

They threw dirt after them, till to the covert of a wood 

The howling maiden led her father, where wild beasts resort, 

Hoping to end her woes ; but from her cries the tigers fled. 

All night they wandered through the wood ; and, when the sun 

arose, 

They entered on the mountains of Har. At noon the happy tents 
Were frighted by the dismal cries of Hela on the mountains. 

But Har and Heva slept fearless as babes on loving breasts. 
Mnetha awoke ; she ran and stood at the tent-door, and saw 
The aged wanderer led towards the tents. She took her bow, 
And chose her arrows, then advanced to meet the terrible pair. 



VIII. 

And Mnetha hasted, and met them at the gate of the lower garden. 
" Stand still, or from my bow receive a sharp and winged death ! " 

Then Tiriel stood, saying : " What soft voice threatens such bitter 
things ? 

Lead me to Har and Heva : I am Tiriel, King of the West." 

And Mnetha led them to the tent of Har ; and Har and Heva 

Ran to the door. When Tiriel felt the ankles of aged Har, 

He said : " weak mistaken father of a lawless race, 

Thy laws, Har, and Tiriel's wisdom, end together in a curse. 

Why is one law given to the lion and the patient ox, 

And why men bound beneath the heavens in a reptile form, 

A worm of sixty winters creeping on the dusty ground ? 



16 



TJRIEI,. 



The child springs from the womb ; the father ready stands to form 

The infant head, while the mother idle plays with her dog on the 
couch. 

The young bosom is cold for lack of mother's nourishment, and 
milk 

Is cut off from the weeping mouth with difficulty and pain. 

The little lids are lifted, and the little nostrils opened ; 

The father forms a whip to rouse the sluggish senses to act, 

And scourges off all youthful fancies from the new-born man. 

Then walks the weak infant in sorrow, compelled to number foot- 
steps 

Upon the sand. And, when the drone has reached his crawling 
length, 

Black berries appear that poison all around him. Such was Tiriel, 

Compelled to pray repugnant and to humble the immortal spirit, 

Till I am subtle as a serpent in a paradise, 

Consuming all both flowers and fruits, insects and warbling birds. 

And now my paradise is fallen, and a drear sandy plain 

Returns my thirsty hissings in a curse on thee, O Har, 

Mistaken father of a lawless race ! My voice is past." 

He ceased, outstretched at Har and Heva's feet in awful death. 






THE END. 



s 





\syji0tto , 



** 




10 



In 



m led round their stmny flocks , 
. palcneJs sough (ht Secret <'' 

To Sack awn MX marninf faauly AmUiet mortal day: 
e river af&ona fi&r son vote*. is heard' 
rjptwf fomenfa/ion raus like, fnornity de*r. 




li/e cfr/iis our spring ! 



fade these cfiifaen oftte gprinf ?latn but 
!7hel it tike a.wotoy oow. 
' 



fates 
rin 
like, a 



(otos of the 
to 
aoua. 



Like a refaction in aylaJs .'(ike snad4W& in tAe --"., 
Like dream J ofinfalsjik a. smite upon an infants face* 
Like Jhe /o**s pc/cf .like transient 3ay.!ike majcc iVi ihe air 
Ak 'jtufy wjx J lay me ofoMrn antljentle rest TW head. 
w t sleep of death andjeriiy hear the ' 

in meyarckn. in (h? event*? time . 
f^f ^ 



at 




ynect. 

Jo weak T/ifa; (<jed *ttte^>c* >terces o*Tw 
J am rtji/etf fowi /leavm <tnd he Ika* sro'es on oJt 
lks in tfK. wUyr , and each w*>m H?r me spreads hi 
, ryoict tfon. hvmUejr* .Moa ***6crm (jit* ft 
u venue Tnaitf <ri silent valleys and of modesto rooks 
^ (ho* shaft h cbfad t'n (Iffo and led tr/(A morn** 
tl( Stunners heat metis the? t 

: Kien 




My sXouMlkmistreB oflfu volts of HAY, Ufr A syk. 
Skt cea& A* smild in far5, then **{. d*** i* 

TKti <vtsrtrd,0tfiotLM viyi* aftlte pta&fid Vetip. 
#A( f< 

nouns)* 



. 

iing Ais Tn'tf anc/ >neecbti TnoufA /rom a#c0nfc?ft>&5 

honey ; 
scatter 



, 

But Jjtttis hkn a. faint c&vat K< 
7 vanish front jay 

lW<5 



<auirer( , ask /Ac fourfe* e/ou/ . 





. 




<* 

]e vnntf*n said. IcJiarye t/tee Hu to Tnc 
west not when in on* houttfiou fade away: 
feK thee .otrf *>0* nr\d;ai\ Jhel is Kfa to mf^ . 
/ cornfrfatn .and no one. fieeu^sjn/ Veice- 

tide* fiead^Jiis IryM &r/n emejjyv, 

> O3+ LfinVf lio faft fff 'Jfld 



u ir<ryuL hiowst ihotL not our sheds drink of th. jfotdtn 
M<?/< X-^rwA db(A ten w ^s ftorres ; looks( Ihou. on 

iW remains/ Onw'd / ttU fae.whei\L 

rt 4 n ~M life, ^ (ove, (o peace, and rej. ,^ 

.dn\y .V/eyJt Tny upd winj-s upon, bvlrny 

fat eytd 0Kw, fafaJce K ft, fat- s/untny 1enf 

imblina Kneels oefore th*. >tfen sun . 
vw -** v-vr-vi u" G.jpo(tf<zn oct/itf cvt\d yi*^c^ fx&f ' 
Ot walk ufuttd faarinf &od to aft oio> /fn^ flowers. 






And all shaU JTO> ^v^/ fcw ^"5 shinny wo>ncu\ 
(A <^ii/ j^ oo^ 6v ?o 6< / d^oi^ /A<? y^ o/*HrMnj . 

ncfrnaf upo* Acs <3^y Mw?7 cv?^ answerd -thus,. 



sbw^fnaf $Y u ^' Aoivjrfef- 
Lz/es not atone mrr far ikdf 
75^ M*a wor^ jfm <ts tomy 



&* &*6my;ev&/ Thing 
ntf- 



, , 
c/5" wu^ce- 



* a , . 
^r* ? 

HI 




as 



tonM 



v/xm i/S de*y 

. f thoti. but a 
lih^att infart Wrttifxd. in IheLWr* ifof: 

- 



Art (/ion a Ttirm ?imae of*nkne(s. Off thoti. but a Wor/n ? 
Isee thte li 







(? 6 



of f^e iWes oTHar,. wi 
e tfte meaneti thvy, 



wof /o?- 

laminated: 



Gut he thai loves ifie > lawly, pours jiis oil upomnyliwcl 
And kisses me. and binds his nuptial bariVs^ around rny breast. 
And -says ; jJu>n molM* of my cAndren, Jfiaw 2ov&t ihee 
And. J f nautftyen. 1/iee crown 1/iat none can take oay> 
f/ns iV srttet tndft Iknwr npt t <x.nd J cannot know 



vei.1, 



daughter dteaMty wipM fcrjafriM if firs ilfi 
Aid.Alc&'.lknewTwl ms.anct ifotefoe Sdl 
6oa wndd ?o^e A Worml h&w, an^jb^uu^ / 
a( wilfal Irriscl zti Mfittb form s lut thot hz 
ith milk ane(ol( /nvw knew, juio? tftre/oi< 6* 
c 7 c&nfleunct in the -mild &*, lecause J 
d wy >n< aown ^n njy cow dec? 



it 



rny ^ 



na 



, matron 

7r?o<zn5 n?r oer wy tort, kit jA 
2t/f<n */er my h*<u. <t$ 
io return ."tear -n.enJtor \uilk 




Je eternal gates fem& porter lifted the northern 
el enterd in & jctw tie secrets of the land unknown 

Stur the couches eftfiedea.ct. 4: rtfiere ifa nitrous rv<. 

wery Aea*l on earth infixes deef> *tf rcst&fc twists.' 
tana of Sorrows 8t ofteurf vhere never smile was seen. 



-. .^ i/z the toncl. ofcbuds (Aro 'valleys dark, Lst\ 

Dolours k.la.mev'tatitons^u'altifiQ o& I e side, a cfeup grave. 
stood in silence , faitrung to the Voices of fhfgrounct, 
her ovt9.griAOe.ptot sKe. ea.n\e, <%.Jfar* J& ^ai CM^K 
>* voice ofsvrnv reo&v tnwi the fo&t 





an. Scar, a. MirLxrol ferctTt* dra* creations 
JK<ibd V*<k inkalino terror frunbby A 
a. tind&r curb upon iRe. youtHuL vurmrif ooj ' 
a. tirtt curtain olfiesfi o Zfe fact c Acr cfcs*ft . 




Eye ^eesr jnore than the Heart J(rt>*&. 





'ument 



f ivaar not ttafJtameti 
trmadtUd- ut mv Su&t 
-And I hid m 'Leutha** Vale . 




sr How , 
J rose up from Vie *><tle ; 
tne. temlfte ttuuusr^> tare 
vtrfem, mtuiile ui from. . 



\ 





LSI 






^s wi.r vi, tne DatifriUsnt aflrftlian. weep,' r 
tftw arpunfmfiy,- ut tn&r ^a/texf. ^AJyis to* 

C^ 3 -f s ST '/ 

~fcr tru? j/tort iottl af^TytiincA, C/fft.nJCQft- jfauutervf in 

nlariji tn Hafay of i,cuout s&JtuA Jwnmr& tt> eout&rt Jutr 
tAusf jJtf spoke to the brijfit M:s?g0Lii efJLeutjuig tfttL 



yotfJt nptieJ ; ptufk -duu iy Iww Octheat. die 
doll jpriftfc. btcaugt tie J**// af^sueet 
aa'ap, she ceu&cl & olafd 



Can 

affuwn. fJut&t du JLavtr 3*yoig, I pluck time & tip 
ffMtlr. and pat tfae kt*e -to )ofan> i>tt*f&t fy brttastar 
dm* 1 turn jny soot 1b mJttn? ry Mlfuk jfeul seeJ& . 



0>> 



Mttvtarman-r JHign, toj/e Jur iotpetuaug ocucse * 



Jpraouan ypd; br txtk Ais 
2<ar t/u uAt nuuil, MteC 



. an. Msf 3tt>nty> 
Jw mnuf aftpaiLl Jiuf tJuatdUe* JuOf^t 



,'M/onutfri ^spdoe . BelieteL *ieV Jusrict )wc on. J3n>mt*nsr bed. , 
tut t tft* jeakutf efafaAinf jport tmtuttd t&f loiflv Jitaul ; 
JftA sltrmrtcan. flouts art nute ,. axd- *une tfa /wrtk Sc, 
npt wctfi .r jai/M^- are t&e &*artJy childrm of thf 
Tie? ant o&tt4nt f liu' nanst net.tJ ot die 
" 




_y^* thou. 
Gt Hremuins 



marry IZromMnsfftar Let. anaL Jiratfct the. chfM, 
. tkat OtduxH -shall put . 



2 



Jttnf 



i 

r \cyr' 77 / / /// 

linen <S9rmf runt lheuiormtyt& unua;Jie solid . 

j n Mnd. Jefded Aty btuck traleuy tfacecf jvund the. 'adulterate pair 
> t\ Tlt>unJ fttteh to Ttack ut J&namtansf cartes tuw k, aitk*i& 

' r/^f/fy <ztttranee uhe*tamtan ^tts *batnng tfu threshold hard 
1 ^jMih secret tfarf: beneath Aim. sowa Lke rtajtos 1 an a, deyart snort' 
'jne votfe or sfatfey beneath tftf sun. and children bouqkt urn 
That ^Juver tn. reh&ouar caves bentaxfi the burrun& n& 
Of L&t, that beich- tnce&nnt bum the stamuts at the eartn 



'ii 

f 







Oathjoan, tfeeps ne>t;^he cannot weep! her teaa art Locked up! 
Rut she can htnvl infeKant writhing her soft 3tno$y lunhy. 
sina oalLfijj ItifiXxr/nang Fr^jgp to prff upon, her JlSn 

wtlh. hoy *>tce . Stinkf of the soundtng Jtf 
< ayfty t/usr denied, bascm that 1 jnay tmeet. 
unafee or Jhedoroien, an. my fture tra/isparsnt breast. 




hay dene 



at her call descend &, rend, their bkeduig 
Ihevtorman. severely jeoulef . her sout tdUct* me smile,' 
/if the clear sprute jnudte<i **dh J&t aT b&uts gv*a pufe 

oFAliuiit Jteor J*cr *>oe*. 6c eecno lock her 

Why <btsr mr Jheotaemut. jftJt veepuig upon the threshold,; 
-*wul Gothcon, Jtovety Jay hug sute , cr-**adinb ktm ut 
I <? orvsv. O Thtotarnuui r the 
J3orJy at ihe treating day. th* 

IDie lade doesr rustle at tfte jtpe corn , a/3 the jEagte 
J'tvm. w&fab pr*y, and tc/te J*is golden, beak to me pure 
sSrhaJu*> "the tfast fain hut untnartalDvueruf iff O 
"The -srust ffuxt &leef& tiro lotto, jfruste myjtfi&ytnrmfOT. I am, pure 
uffe the. mdit ts gone that das'd me in dlf deadb MACK . 
told, me &at the ju&ht &, day en all that I cvidd 
totet me. that J Juul t fu* jfcns-af to mclnse tne up . 
they tnclasfid r tnjintlK brow tnto a siarrow ascis . 
*unA my heart into the &. a red round gtote. Art 
Jut aJl Jfpjjt. life I tva* oiUtercttied and erased. 
Jnstoad of morn. artM-f a. Jrigtit duieUn*. tike an, gye . 
A the eastern, elaud. : instead efntght a Jtc&ty charnel ht>use ; 
Jnat Jhtvtorman hearer me not / to Jutn> the rug/it and awn. 
bcih attAe; a, sag/it 0f ' stffta ^ a. Morning ' 



'-, 





f 

jlnd none but Jofoauait can, Jieaf my lamentations , 

With wAat sense & ct mat the chic/ten. ^shuns 1 t/ic ravenous' Jia*K 
With, M>hat~ ^rensfe does? the tome pifecan measure out the expanse ? 
With TV/tof s8n.?e dae& ftie bee for/a, ceUa? Jtove not me atause 

and eons and sense &F touch* yet are their habctatoans '. 
fruur pursuits ', ^z.< tlifferetft: asf metr Jorms and off tfietrjcps 
iftf wild aJff rthy, Jie refuses? t>itrden&; and. die mee/< camel 
^ L<vesf man: is? tt~ because of eye. ear mouth or ^/cm. 
hrcaXJung nostrils? No.&r these nt m>lf and frfeer fiaVe. 
the bund n>crtn me jsfecretsr of the ^nave, and rthy her ta 
'e to curl ruimd the bones of death./ asu) asdt. the ranicus-' snake 

dir gfty po'f&an. : &. "the ^'"^^ eagle wjir Ji# lyef me ~*fun, 
then tell. me. the maujjjht& of 'man, that have been tud or aid , 



( ktoe 
Jyr 



*vgr afl the night", and all day ceutd he 
jjie&t&rmon -a/ire H'ttda turjt hiy wved ^gres upon t 

etui J 6r de&d when J reflect thy irnage pure? 

test: C/ie jfiut t/iat the nfom feedz an. &> the >vttl 
tie* Washd^ bunk tu -fed toctlt. the village, ssiak & die 1 
the red earth of our uttftufrtal river; J bathe, try Mu^ , 

f aja, *>Ju& <uui putt t& /wver found \Uteotonnons 



e 
JPy 

-JinJi 



C^~ *> f 

jLnen. jtneattormm Drake. Jutf &b/ice and ne 

leu me >Aa cy the stfe/it- or day to one oerftowJ, tVft/t *>>e f 
.Teu. me W/uxt:, tsf 0. fhoupAt} &c, of what guhstance is' it meu. 
l&ll me what fjr ajvy.\ & in, what ardejif do Japs' grant / 
Jaid ui ttlJut rtt>er& ^wtm the scrrtMtsl'and upon wJuit jnounttunsf 



ode f 





_ of dtffantfKt} and ui *tha natures 

Drunken t&ck **> &rf>ettesi. and jtnuf ty> Jrvm cold 

dwell Cne tnauttnty jvr\->aram till ftu>u fall tfiem juftfi 
ft* *A&e deU eh* JcjcJ a oil? tSf m/isrv tA* arjyent Luvitf.' 

f/ifsi *UL fAy stnrMt again <5e tnf /ugA? ef ttfttinvn oast ^ 
- f *"&* truntrs* ilme& <Sc ^paaef v rfmptf and bring ^ 
t.a/raart.*' into a. present jav/TN' and a. mbjht or flout. art 
WHW J*9tiSt tfwu. c ' tJiougftt! 1i> i?Aa jrarvm land isr ay Jug/it. 
Jr VUHJ. rtOtmfst to the. pfearenC jn/UMnt or adnu-f/vn 

Wilt ttou. bring comforts an M> wings, atial <>ms and. j^.u? and balm.; 
Or pcLSon. JRam Cfir de&urt *hJds. Am, th* eres or' the *witr. 

jBrantttut <sttuis and jsneak t/t* cavern m fiat 



t tmctent Crottg ~sen r thtru: 

thea fAaf treetf and. frtutzf JleuruJi uf>crt tnf turtn. 
ratxfy ssnsfcsr unAnown ? trees teaattSf orui 
ff**. . not unparrtetML. ^ftr&tct in t/lti ut&utf 
.In fUa<C& yet usivtsit&i Jy tfif ivroQer . and. ui, 
Over anoDu-s hnd of Jrifusr. arvl t a&tiaspJiereyf unJ(:o'n 
y^A / fire f/icre txhr toanx , besuit tne htany of ward and 
'd T then vtfier ^'orro*3- , beatde t&t jtanv& aT parrjy/ 
are thetre othfjjc).f, Atsudf dtejvyy of rifJies avd ease? 
is iherf net- <an ia*> /or botn tnf {ton. and the. ax/ 
u thsre not cttr not, fine, aad eternal cA^une. f , 
Me bind. 1he mhaMat<vs of existence from, eternal U& . 



cuteel 



off the eta?, 



ttU fbs 







O Urt zen. ,' Creator of znen! mistaken.' Demon, or heaven, 

~5^ iaicf ar tears' .' thy^Tubaur fain,, to Jorm, Jtten ~to thine, un&fee ,{ 
f . -^*~^ / '* '/ / -^ f 'ft* i_ ^"^ - 

'OM> can- one toy cutsforb another, are not dtrtierettt _ 
kly. eternal f udinitit^ and each Jay i& d JLave . 

\ Bc*& not ihf- fareat~ mouth lau&t. at a. at ,\ Sc. the _ .- 
\At the laaour mat: o' abcve. pavjnent, and rtijt thffu tufce the. _ 7 _ 
/ for thy ccunceuffr? or the deg . Jar. a, &chpobnas>tKr fe thy children, ? 
' Does he who contemns poverty, and he *>h0 turns vliat abhorrence. 
1 Tram u&ury; jeel, ine same, pa&uui cr are tny f jrutfed alike. / 
\ How can the gu>er of &&& experience the deughfe of the mercJuint / 
Ihe industrious t citizen the pains' or. the Juigbandznan, . 
ddJereftk Jar tne Jot &d Jiirditig twin Jtouoni drtun; 
bupf whole co.rn fields' into wastes . and ~$2/ziS' upon the heath- ; 
different their eye ttnd ear .' how different me world tc theat. f 
does? tne parson clatai the labour of the farmer) 
-& &: pns &, trapsf. &, how does? he surround him, 
.. cold. Jloodfi or absttnuction, , and with Jorest? of s&litude , 
To build Aim outdo? Mid hi^t ^piresr, #here kintesf <fc priest* may drtelL . 
Jill jfa wJwbiu-ns' wdh.^ ou &.and hut*& no *ed lot/ *r found 
si/jfyfr 3 '<" ""* *? one - si " e loattis'; euid, fnust ^he drag the chum, 
tsr Ufe f ut, wearr lust,' jnu&t chilling < murderous thoughts, oc&care 
JUte clear Jteaven or her^ eternal .spring j to bear the wintry ru&c- 
s OF a, Jiar^h terror drtun, to jna3he?, bound to hold a ro 
' Over Aer jttrvtkitfe jhouldeKS all the day: &, all the rujshfr 
lo airn ths ytheeL or jtiisK aesrtr&? and wnfeinosf thai? twute her 
To the abhorred, Birth eF cherubs in, the human, firm, 
.'; ^^ ^ e * pestilence 8g die a meteor Ac are no mare . 
; Mlt* the tJutd delL ndh one he hater, and dp the deed he 
flfld the impure scaure farce hi* JeecC into i& unripe 
L. -^ L AV - can behaU the arrows' of the da 




sf the whale Huuetuf> at? thy /outsteps euf the Jiungr/ dog ? 
Or doe& Ji& ^cent the mountaut prey, because .Jusf Jtastnfa wide 
Dsart ut ihf ocean? dac& ht& eye discern, the. Joying d0ud ^ . 
ds- t& raven sr eye? or doesf Jui measure the fxpanste fte the vulture/ 
- Dae* the jtiM spider m*t the dig* Jure eagle-/ JtuU tharj'oung ; 
Or does' the fly re/otce . because me harvest t& brought ut / / 

Doey jwt the #&H Jtam Ine. earth. & d&puare the. Jreaswc* .beneath.. 
But the awU hwrtelh: what tjf there ,&: the tferat shott tell it tnee . 
.Dcest ju tht warjn erect a pillar at the jnouldenng 



an . 



a pal** of et*nv& ut, > 

furck ttu&t **xvt* are vrtUm .Jake . t& WUs 

6* d? tool* A ^tueet tjy vthnt Jet* rent* J 



j. luat&L. Jiajgr 
Jnnocence .' 





Sue avttL&ty, jftt&u 
mvaJcest *ift tfwu tfi/art 

Or **rt 1/tcu. /u& attaAe when all 

TAfn const tfiau fcrtk A awcfest 

*Wtm. Mty JSufuL mnefar sp jtifafa , . 

Anai facuitl. it with tfu name at where: & sfell it in. the 

In jtt/f/tag. ev/i nxtfteut a. *Aiaper, ami ut jfeetrun** 
Jret^tfttf tb"*.zn.y and hob tvapers', IvjJtt 

One* **re thy /<& lgfite& jp- the cres ef Aam&t atom 
And, tfatf jry \7fa0tamian. ^fffA thy fapeiTitK aiactesp .' f 

~Ihie /touting, art/ut.jvcnft. Jearful. ccuOurusr, trembling Jypocrcte * 
^^hen is' 0GOuM>n a r'fwre tndotti .' a/id all cAf Strain r 
Cif life / juxrfcts; anal 'fjffieatermon. csf a ^szcX sn/ihs 
nneL Oetkoan. is tJu cna/p* jdatig 




J3a? tfct&pati uf 0t JSO. a. virgin /iU/ n>ar svgi/t 
CJptn tojgy anai to deufJtt- **Acre ever beauty 
It V- tJl* jnarnLi!> jgun ^SjCrul it," there 





In hajjfiy apuLttetrt- ; if tn evening jnlld. wegrted Wjjh w 
Stt cat A book and draw the Zea&ur&s' of tru* ff*& o 



ted Wjh work . 



of tlesftre/ die mam&it or desire ! 7ne 
>W4sr Ar au*n; ^shcul an/aAea her maatb to enarou 
In tne Secret shadow or her chamber; ihe^youth Jfud- W> from. 
TKe lustd ley. jshati, &rget to generate. &. create an amaroiuf 
Lt the ^rhftcfattiy afJnsr curteuns. ?nct tn Vui Arias' of Jus Silent p 
jflre net thesfe the. pl&cejf or religion 'the. rewards of continence. . 
c lhe Jfelf enjoy i gsf of ' ^relf dentaE; t Wiy dost thcu. &eek 
Jf it because ftctsr are not lovely, that thau, jreekest 
Where tf& Juuvi&le darkne& ts tmpre&eaL mtji reflections of 

father cat J&zlousy . be tnou accursed rratn. tne earth,; . 

'Jheatorttwit tfusf aceiutyied trung* ? 
houldeKs' cfad&ul and, cast 
the xnargui or itan- entity , 

cry, JL0re! 'Lave ,'JLqve! habpy hapgy 2,ove!-ee a* the otoutdnut wind / 
that be JLcve, that a(rM& cuustfter asf a. 



. 

hat t&ou. taught 
beauty jades? foot 

w 





, . drtnksr M/ater 1 

cloud? withjealougy hisr Jiiffasf, with vteepingy aM the day : 
-Spin- a, tve6 aST **jte arouruL niai.grgy eutd hoarr dark 
Jusf^ &** .srtfAen. at the &uct that Jiasigy before Jus? 
is 1 ^efr-uwe that en^sr all .' a, creeping &kectoa. 
LasnpU(o ^ef watc/unfe arour&oi the. /reg&T, Marriage 



But jfitten J&&J and .traps- of adamant waV, Orthaan sprea 
~*in0 catch, for thee. girls' or auld ^ilrer. or of* jtruJu& gold ; 
1 tt lie oe&tde t/i& on a. 6ank &, vte& t/feir Hrarttnn pyzy 
In lovely copulation LUG- an ^li& *fcth ^Sjfteatarman. ; 
Red asr ffte rosy jnornmg> f tustfiil asf the Jirst barn beam, , 
Oetnocn. -sna.il vte>*> Ais 1 dear deligfzt, star e'er wtth, realous' c 
Cane w. th* heaven. <zf generous? love; nor srel/ish bu^i&ngy hristg . 

Does & ^ten, walk tn. giorwus' raiment, an the Secret 



H//<wv tAf colfi jn4j0r 
CM, Atar -Stune 



fay ^oLei/ or <ws" tn* kicJit ciouud 
' dae-f Jus <&e behofc the faam^ mat bangs 

* 



to t/it eye <f fittp 2 af *>uf Jie butet 
ox to dy Juv<jL torso* .' e/oes net" mat mdd. beam owt 



me 

lot. the o*>l. the . 

Jtoa fiwl tukey the *nntrf 6/ajt '. lor a tivrufy to ker 
me #iUt ^tuJte t tfu pestt{*nc* t adorn Jum ntk fjtuiS &c. 
trees. &, bu-dy .tc betu&e, fe mf* . befurlct. their eternal 
f* J'0u IJtif &latu?f wrAs'. and .jirfe y*w? vditnt up 



. . 

cuui JnnK jour 6& . fir rwry thing t/utt latf tsr Aofy f 



thus tvery mnrmnfr tulg Ootbon. but "ffieatorman fits 
g margin^ ocean cojuters/uig aA j&adontf 



The Z/uughtery <x Jllbion Jieor A*r Mots'. A. etch* bad< tutr Si 




frtn&l, WBLake 




I will ann .you a. sonfc ci L.O*. tte i'-tenwJ PropJt;' 
He *tmg it to four Karjwr at nw. .tabled F Etewuty. 
^*< -"" Li Jw-HrL-fornieo. Africa "'-? "~"in*ia ifrn 



1/ri^en. Ikcicci .' f Arj^tWt .sW^njJ 

riias " " "" ~ 



/uw j i otut, iHt UIK. jnvmuAiifia ui /iriifiu . - a. i ^~x 

J7t^ so* 'Zu^JM JMW A^ Xa*? to Me JVattanaf t^*fe, 
^ ^ hatvt* p/ tjtf. children nf l.af . c\^ *>**^^*Q r 



&m>e ^^VKt^Pfu/aiSOf^- tr hroma >Jn thf Z'ts 



r /> ^t' . "*o .*ct 

uman, forad spirits in smiljte /n 



one water ;jo I ft tfse/n. War o/t; j///*tes rf^ 

* 1 ** rt ~ ~ 



L g* 1 ** Ei>w 

shrunk bene<Jtii tAe 



oftun- jltt tn .fires Jrcni CJin/sfpJi^* 
cists- beheld ufiv/t MountJSnOt -fi'rins 



. Palamabrcx 
^Socrates 56 



V&K/ Jc&i&^jleivj Ivr. vourja. mail of 
i^f 6cs 



tc Mahanet a, leas* Jliblc gave 



But in. die North, to 
cf DiralaJa 




werv. the Cnurc/uis" : Hc^tflUSiCasties PalacesT"? 
&>' 4c guts Ac- trans' to cote/i Me ims or Eterwfy 
"^s^Ana alt the rest a .depart ; "^-^ * 

a, aream Etxrtuty Mas obliterated &, erased, . 



Titncc tha dreari ao} n'hen Jjar and< t J~le'/a. fled. ^ 

Because tdw kretKreti &c, siettfrs' U\>cL in "War &>LaSt : 
T/ta ay tney fad, they ^nru 
i Litv two narrow dolettJ, jbrirtf :^ 
Grey ing ui. reptile, flesh, upon. 

And all. tfre vast cf"*/Paure -shrunk 



Jut3( dte terrible, rare. cfL.es <Sc 
, finis 1 Ac JirMgyons to tne 3vns oFTIar 
vut mere f JLvrm : i. ' 

vftpt^ensfs H>a->' ., 
ft into ttu>. .turncig of Jretvt 






&, Locke. 



Of 1 \J.otnJ? roU. kfaxy uprui. the Alps round Jiotuseau, &nxtxarf 
$^nd on. tnR mountains cr Lebanon round the deceased Gcds\ 
' Of/hia.; &, on~0ie c/fsorts (fji/riccL rorjjv) lAejfti//i^n^et^. 
~^fff Guardian, Prince, afyflbtan. burns in. hta jugfafy tent 






m*t y^-^- ^ 




IBM 



the. prtde of toe Aeart Jtity nuf, : v 

e fust or tne fyesr mar te quenfAd., < 

ft' - . _ ^* *j- - ^< ^ . i 



tnf afiypatK MT ui its' ^wfanc* . T^* 
ftf dulJUL: and tnt Mosfrdsf a&S<L up 



teack mortal Htanns the 



leaafy mam, the 



^^ | ' ^1_ 

jen. nearJ, tA&n &y i ** 

_.,_- sLuldnife Hwuto yui&S 

^ Went eflurjnixut abow- tfi fed 'ftarnei* ~L. ^ W% *~JK 
; cttuults of dcsptur Uu4> the fteavtnsr 



fo t^undpj^ <f tyrgeli. belLomi 
his roven. dcirfctcJGr abate . 



otuar 
i- Like a, jKrpwt of 





PROPHECY-, 




LAMBETH 



cuuu'nbff' at tsrawna sffooa, btxore r 

y-v ^- -ii 7 /i f ' Tl ' ~~^> ' / "* / / O ~J 
fourteen snn.v haa. ttunfljr tourneye oer fits dark nbofie-: ^ 

*^> -7 * L -"TZ, ' ' x r -^=^ " V 1 / 'n 'T. >-r^ > *y ' 
>ocf ^lie brouffu. ui iron oasltaS.nBt .dnaK tn cutty or iron: 

aa/A Jttur ai nam3a($ .Temalr fStooei,^ 



]lni>ubtrat)le'~aw iiaJtea r sw>e tmere, clouay rotl'jvuna hty lot/iff. 



s " . r^ 

Desfiu-fic 
tgm/Mc tfi 

r atmu rvLl* m me darn air; ^tint^ Moocl as ntjjytt: 
iet>ertramJiec iron, ion^yte nxjLlwure or^otinaarise; 
aunw fill mSTarme) clay when. Ore ahoya hi* htnx emtouae 

l/a/x. virw; Jala me ncury yvuni .tn}' iather -stbern rtbhorrcuT\^ 
vcfy my temvla. chains 'wnl&^ifrll on. fu&fi my sSpirtt stoars; \ 

-> - 7 ^N--=- sT -, >-^J ' ^1J f J 




funa air Jjillan' or Urtnotui^ancL rvunt) thy v 

On. the Cautaffuw Midas' I IvLL, feme my xptrrt TuUy. ^S^TXJ?^ 
Kr cfuunaC '/teneam I nincl tnexe cofa-asr; When mou. brtnfepst hocL 
1 novfi my fty, and my reel jyes jsaar to ocfioia tny /^fif.^TXJ) 
In ttaui-! tntsrr cunuLf rail fa Itj Jno, Sfiuae ai&Tinm mrjtnt. 




_ 0c.ipairui> loiie. ana *strant> as jeaiottSfr . 
_ry stum/Jay /wi3 me Lakf. foe arr me *tristy of jwe; 
JwuncL me tartftf urtnf Aestjga ate pardtrfe s t ru fiff irt & trtvnb; 

\lacA cloud 3unis its tgfttiuiigy to tat silent Jeep. 



>.St*w msr Jinc jaw me bnrwle oor men bumt me vtrfeui cry . 
T * v'*^ ^*^( "^\- "* /^- "^- ^"" 

htmf tj<ge.lTuu* Tountl meeTfc I *itt not Lt iLee ( 
r fu>u art me image of God. *>h* dweller at JarkntG at 
2-/vtcl tnouaft ituln. 6 t)>e me ua> ut rt^onS cr dark 
\ On aw Junenoan fJatner I ffti me jitrugfehnfe aaltdioni? 
EnaunJ. y rootff that ffriatf tnetr army into me jum/T^ 
I see^a^Sfrfient tnCancuLi , Mlno courts mf to tuslavt 

J/ijYIeXuo un ill able , and a. JLiton. in. jre. 

/*' " W? I '^\L O" *f**s~ "*~1 ' I ' 
sfee a. tinale. in mekjlauai-jtea, annkcnfe . 

wot iiaii raiding poms I Feel, tb foe 
JUtngLe uiJtomtrfe faatsr. tn JUrtvvta'jiy tnv t 
Zhuf a eternal death. : (ina. Intf, uie torment 



* *^*^-v 

uffes rent; 



Lftta/tan fluioc g/jdtat many in fuf Mffiy 
aan dfjmathe unf to jfotencar snore: 
afutortik? men. dtv> nae in .ftlmt nsjjfc, 
^y.%rto^ & Gnat 
en t/ie coast S^riiit^ " x fcomjlitany Kinr 




e ; frtrndr if.'menat laak ever Vv jmantu* &e& : 
,n tended la* & linw tnjig&en, & a hedvy Iran cbun. 
^Defctn&r' link I? unk bvoijlutuw? di&f acroar tne s'ea to mfui 
,j JjjvauKf Sc sans? of Amsrira., tut our xtcejf pale ana. yelled ^ 
fi#*dr deprest, tvuiar *>cak,ereae t&mvust, hutstr **-& 
*\Ji&t btttdut& on tb suit Mvuls. <W flk SurvHtf of tk 
^\Defoe/3 to gpnerotun* mot ui At&tne hotey 



sea. 



Me Strung A>ux ceosil: Kr a. tarr&lf Mart sntept cvef tne having 
^Me eastern cleutl rait : an Just cliay stood/TiManr tffnxauuLjruux 
bxhen form clashing his scale? at xuctn&te Jte anae, 
fJuuu/ red mfteoaf round the land aFIAunan beneaai . 
ttoice,Juf tacif f ^ar ataul Jwuldeaf, 







to mttAoumaaa* upon tne 




*ru>e the Aaanfrc *ka*y TjftMtnn the ft! wary nations , 

3 *H^rtf. tftlrniHr. .nvm tts dfipf red cfauJr Sc rqginb Jtres, 

/tlf ** -/ rf T' I / / -*y f 

SHoton (^ ju-Jt .^/tmertfa ratals-, enraha trie ^crtrfJt 'prem. 

/Zr fuunan. blood daeti/g ^ *** /l s' all mtuw tlw nrffed hftiven 
Jtd. m-fc fftf f/aue/v from t/ift^/m^uitu: in iia-it n'hrb cf blooct- 
in f/ir /va( cJtnuis nne tt Winder oer (Sir fiun/tttc ^-ra 
Sliuncui^ fre Jurnr* ^a xHnb. an tfie Hkx/&<?*^, 
C/f rron Peatexl rn fnc lu/rnKV : Juy terrtbtf lunb >ene rtrc 

tfmrsr banners? dark A tDtfet^ 
out /tat u^lit t*tyt Om> the jntLr atma- 









J%e terror Uke a comet, craufg Lke the J *& f 

^^^Wy^^N^X/^V^i^/ r -> 

2Jat once tncta&l die tern&te i^atuJerui^ comets in ds SpJtere. 
Jhen -Meuy diau dost <nir center. Ac the planet* time Jl&i round 
crunyan disk; sro ^r tb Sun. Mtos m am dry' red ' 

^y y //*/ "*/ / "- -'' 

Jpectre gu>>d tug homd length stnuung the tempi 
beamy atLlood; g tJua a voice cane Jartfi. and , 





stnaJte. injuring ttwtte, breatfurib 1 , aM>afcntrifef \^ 

^ ks redeemed captives nhen tnetr Lands Ac Iwr* are Lurst; 

Let me isuufe )ymturit> at me mill, run out into t/ie Jielc/.: 

Z / / ' . ~Jy / 7 / ./ / / 

et nun. UMK up into the haavtats &. lau&i in me onfe/at cur' 

Let tne incfuuneJ. svui jffuit uf> in. JarKnear and in- ntghing, 
' WAasti face hay iiu'cr sraen a smu in thirty rteary years; 
Juste ant) Look out, Jus chains are loose. Jus aunfeean ooorsf are open. 
let fay vtae ana. clularvn return, avtn out obreb'ars stourbe; 
lean behind- at every step c oeueve it: if a. tdr&xat. 

*, Jlte Sun. has left Jus blacknfhr, &. Juts' found, a. vcshar . 
fie Jour Moon raoue^ ut. the dear &, t*teuJlel& ntfjht; 
Jar (ytnptre is no mare, and ncm> tne J^ion ^rWolf*inaJl cease . 



1 *' '^VJV II s A 

mm 



' eves tn Jus ttrrJtc form 

r 




!fts* 



"X "4 



trrrer ans>*erd.' I am Ore. rtreatfid round tne accursed tree: 
hates' are ended; nhada>#r oak Vie tnanunb fetns'J& break; 
Jhe neryjw, that Unyn txntertBd. to ten commands', 
*nnat ju^ht he led tne Jtkury Aaytsr thro' the Mkde *klderneJsi ; 
wot -stony La*! V staoiit to du^t: and scatter religion abroad . 
Jc the fyur n'intJs ay a tun bock, If. none sfAalLgatner t/u tea$es\ 
]ut they .shott, rof- en depart fande, <fe consume in batta 
r maKg tne destutsf i/a&om.Q the deeps jSnnnJc b their . 
ind burst the. 3tany roof. 

j ; -. o > cv' sBfi/^ l/uQuvcty, ^*^^ 

had it en a harlot, and in coarse-cjaa Jwnesty 
undenl'd. tno' raitisntl in, her cradle, fiihht and morn; 
every t/unfe that lives & Jidy Ue deugits* in Itfe; 
Htecause ate jxnd of Jtoteet deU^Jjt can never be deti'd . 

t ft t j C2~ * 

J i uv& uivfrnf) me earthly felooe, yet man ur not consnand; 
Amidst me lustful hresf ne HFau&,'Ju& Jeet become lib ImJs, 

Joteesr and thigjis Uce &tlt>er.kJu3 breast arui Jiead uklpld. 



15 



17 




=7 f^^^tnat^^ alarm jyy. ,.,. f ^^. 

^ . eternal nolrf the etmtaljLtan lashy%is tail, 'A 

Umenoo, & dooined; on/el jt 
\jrouck. Acmutfe beGm their 

0atuu Jttrute tne~}tJua,Jtar quenc/t t/ie Ju&u>> 

* * / * I > / 



_ cannot artrib the stubbed oak to oferipvti) L 

female men. stand an the j^ansf. 8$ in mar rolfe^J^ 

duidrert' taxi? jsnelterJrvtn, the 
^_ J^nd fttuteond. rtorr&i mm, trs&r laneh&toj mvo -ttnfanljhe east 

,L)ut? clouds oftxa/v aty ifetui' ^>iytt~. t*^- visuw, Jmat 
^Sciuullsfound!^ UnidtfaF-truaipets? &. oleum ^ ... 
jin. Vtsfuot mm afarf-Ah reoeljmrnt mat nat the 
Jjecutensf; EtentoL wtter ^eb-renertd, rolling in clouds (- } , , 
I yee the ut thick chudsT and darnneK en-Americas' diare, < 

f mbar^ or aoaarned birth,; red names? the cnatjwaltoti^j 
jsf cfeteam; the harlot wtow ok opened ut tkwt ^o"Q 
ut. enorawusf cuvles^Junf the tunes are retuntd upon, theej 
WOwar cftny parent , JU?H? mr unuttera&U torment jrenertsf. ^3 

/ / ^Tx i j / "" 

'ota-, ^etwC'/atp toua. *?ar truartetsr te alarm j 

*/ / f / j X''/X * 

terrible berth, ajvtafc one buKittn^l^hene is < 

/ Minor* me mameK& xnu/C? instead, max f*>er-j> 
I jyarcnea upsr d&> ktn man. gyyv; flat? fou. th 
motner^ofG' ner fatten, outytrgtaw uixxt the snore 
S^stountz/jy loud ifar--tnariAets & alarm, a? tjurtren^ 
' Junvlaratf. eternal WcB? 1ne eternal Lam, bahef * 






a 



10 




's ^ 

isnasp' Jitlii between JTmenca & albiang \snare ; 
Itarrd cutMr me Sltzanttt.- jfisa; cal&t JJauntean Juusf; 
3nxn metr wtiJtl' ^iwuru^y^vH mar fab tp t 
Muace. arcnftyte or jnMifo' (*>atpeney. 
unnwrtal binnacles', built in trie Jurest at GocL 
tne nufe aJ Lecufy Jar ni& ^stolen, briar.. 




on 



tnetr mubtc jtmbr aie mirteeit si/tbeLy ^at perturbd 

ft <2> x^ y / * / ^ / / ~7 * 

'ic hater oer ttie solemn root . 




rage, &. e& thy rasp Jeep Inunber 

rcutut metr~3:hare&,- uidtgnant hiryut& wifh th? Jue> of Ore 
cried, alaud c&vtey Jlett tmv'tne dark. 





) ii _* - v^H^3(^^^H 

tremble? Juuiesity and uJ<e _ t jouurierer. ^W-^ 
~~~ -.- refuge Jram me mowisrarJua immortal button.} 
the generous tremble &T&o>e fuj jcy. to "the idle : to. 

r I ' "i ' x^^ ^*S / r-'^Jvr s^Y^j/f A> */ f\ 
nock Juinfwto ccavnandadtfus; tf/uft(M0',H>ntt!t:/lr^<'i * 

^r me &enr0u& jrom exbertjencR tul vie un^enerou^ 
i / T" J * * / r* jj * -* " ' f "~^ 

unrestrauid pertormersf cr the erter}*te3 . or Jtazure 
~T/r '. ' 1 * *>*^ A- "1 ~ f ^7 "2T *&***>*' ' 

JLdL pity & bectune/a, trade f coicL generaaay a .size_ 

"^VsS=Sr-'~ < *' ' ~f */ ^"6*T/ *~*\ / "* /7 * ' / ^^ 

jOZfi^t ^^" Pt jC kJp',(' tne^ano^aesurt &gD>Ji tome jtnatfe 
^ecT-isfJie, rtrdefuztiy a? * peace. & clothe* him at a tensest 

v ' l lusts-jar tears', and ^fJucns^ff'x'd^st^ 

.-= i ** i . ^~~^^~~**-~ si ' if 
Htrapsr'Juatsrea 

t^v.* / 



Jnfetafi 



>dtaw preache-/ abstinence c 
c\ I T r*i/ 



jto Jnare 



obedience bav* 



ut^ a/v ml the thirteen 
off * thu^/vief to t/>* Aivggy xfuta. Ae. true*' mar g<fl<en 
tens' 
on fAf land 0/JTavnar . uul&uint tM e/esioe.idt*i 



V 

tnf land : Ha/rent &. jitutitag an> tnar Gwamfrffy J 

Jjt trur cffef> ixtwrn . ty "tAsnuifctPn Jcu/tf &: u/rmrt thcr . 
/ A /' / / / ~ ^^ f* '*j ' f ' / ^^ ' 

taf jTivnr foitleei nHirtnt* Juv^f MHtnui &tt>dk/rr . 

tt Tva. wicpuntt' toHkujL? ^rtetcnca. , 
t&ttsu/tcf',- ant/, /ofur n'uub' rvtctcmb (ft fts^~) 
ferret- . ** / / // / 3' *"7- ) ^ 

nb tH jmck Breaths' from the imd. ttrep. Abaffinnb "facie * 

-~/' n T7 / / *^ * i ^"' s 

i iiann*^ a*; dr /r TiirnaCf an me tana 




13 



tf^nt&g landjhtrmae t&ey 



vfe their modal dainsf 



. 

^^ lche& Vav the thirteen, 

ca&yusat; isir&i> th&r julan&f &c mutietsr to 



~~ 

Kam Ptetr etuztouneidsf and tlarfc cast/e? 
: and Jnxn the 

e/uv&d Jiigr &ecn 
joartn toskndrL and burnt eatstrettKt) tot 



, , 
hurt rottfe his? juuuuvusf 



/ tffttt dtsfeastes 1 artjte earfifi tx> cast upon 
i *" . //- ... . 'j*/ 



MtetrJtumlfery^^Jni/^aas^. 




IS 
16 



10 



nirt out 

FrtutLfui fain* ^CTwrw*^^^ Gates & Le& ^ 
us nfara tne tiotce arSiu>umsStnfeel 'We ta uiunaerouf axianarul, 

' I -s**ir^*-r t / Off a ~T* I f 1 ~ I / 

ha Jus: *xae lU> forth out at tfuxr c*aud9 
O\JLAO*, s-v / ff% 

. asra ^,-ttmn to tyct them atr 

ney nr fender corn njuitt ft Itefeutar to appear 

&Juud tk && & 
n>tn 

a. land ui 



cuy o Jnan &, east; I 
an 



feed roarufe Jierce 



^ * / / 

, W tAe&rce ndunfe at tit uthattwtts 

cdzjat* tfo-Xvk ck?e tL^r 



ana unlade 



Tits scribe afPetu^kanut, ousts Jtisf pen. upon #&.&&>;/> 
TEe biu/der afyts&inut tkvrtsTJusr hammer damn, uirear/j) 



'Jlfrt JuXft. j^- --_- , - ^ 

arm Jutd u&t aturtner portion or tne u^ 
///^ n/jrA dobrfA&r* tst, tn& MlJtt ut ~Wsz/trt ana 



ud trier JMK/ 




15 



/Sir Vi funk* 4fAu>tany Gtuudan, tk spotted pta. 




, ufi a Jt0Hl or a/thtu9fi and mra*> 3f in^yr haza- 

>^ r ^^^^^^A^M^^r^ / ^^X"^ ^ 

T / * ,/ j*~. i ' v *A V ^ w ~y / .t_jy */ 

w</ ms^" ^as^ js^Eyrir A ^t>&tcf &> earth &3foac). a. Makd jnutftb/ae . 
*7Jj ' *V? / ' V/ / ^' -^^ 1 _^r t *'-r_^orj' ^ '* >^^ 

-Jiotetts Caartuan Mb-anga, vt tormeat' on me eastern ^fly J^^**^ 

D / ** ' ///*/" /' * **WIP^^ ^ir / ^^ *^* 

jrS'/fe aa&nnb tvrfanal tfi brain Jusf fctafanerufe aese, teem c/udfarirfe\ 
rij ! ' W y*~~f "*? r* 7 ' / ' "^ -/~$ ~l / <Sjf 

jltruwtb 4f.3fiudctenn h& tphtf tfuu>avt& lanytUso tur/i tnu&fe frjifi*> 

C""7 * f IT / /**" f? * / "/ T~- * x*VjL / ~V""7 
,'<+Jumuah lay JU&uiatef Luanua/t. ana tnc a/taenf jnto 
^^^^^, / ^ 7 .^^ .,.,. 



v& cratp an. the our/unh Qu 

- ' - - ' 



tneu- tviaent Jifa 



'<l at, Jiifautos? die Bard atJlmun 'jk&^ me emirmausr Jsu^ue.'f'. 



anaentJtaa>ens 



, rffMWfi* -** w.-**' *'-cs -c - ^ - -^ 

ldat rottS? in. *!rarf%9 (3- kenx 




10 



2.0 



16 




Us, we tfalcs, trie crtzs. rage tntt ma flames' no- 
incited Jmn norm io Jtouln; and llnjfn *ffi0_.sat 
flbcte ail naat'cmf in. t/iutuutt' tt/ncrpd . ctnri*d nis Jetuvus' lu-tui ( 
jTratn cu JIL*' Adly dirwe, Jttif teary ui aeu<e ptteaiiff 
ftilJisiTp into t/u? aeep 3fiJjlim ,' /faiid *>if7i i*rer-Drvn'(i 

*-- V^ / . . f> c>~< / 




cold. 



j*um& kf pound, fortfi . aiid Jtls jtcy mifeajinf& i f ft 

vi V& decD. and. en. tne ^tuuitic saa. rtnctr ^/utfi'tsio . * ' ; 

ti? iirttftf* till .M'lfr t^iiifsi jiftfj Jtstnris afttO Mff *^.v^w* It "; 



Jus lunar, all litter ri 



, ana Ju>ay H'aS nt,f 
me 3tern sLnerLCttny 
clouds' &. ifi/d tntstf Jrcm tfif 



\\ 



Demon 

ic MfeaA mn tn'uhe^cafs <Ju>uIc/. gc'Vern. ocr thr sbvnte \ 
etu/ JZ/i0uia come, wiat Jurutt^e my*** inf 



**n0an' tfte JitWnb trtfvnefi,'f^a/icf J/tMun &. Stow, 
terror tftetfa trie pa/ua or dlotan . OM IJte ancient CruanluvLf C 
fe upcn me deinetdy. ^tnrtten Miem mar ottf/i ologui's' **^ 
sw*' otfaonce fa jnufr vie fu'e. iyxtear artnatr Lutl-buut Jieot>en 
n>ifn Moating fonaear and. tt'On autaenhf or degtKur 

rx: cfcsteasie and. hot, tuialle to ^tem tfi* Jifey of Grc : 
tte Jut! getit* ttftrv commote). Sc. tkir loky and lunges' mdkxl 
the. J&rrx Barney Aum* round, ik. loutoix, & /wutal die dodts' of 





\ M9TU0 w tur&an of 
~4>*l lit* tfif jtivty H 
lot *Li rtJ. *UM. ami morn 



cioutif aroimil lyi fairing 

or A ouaitlt round ay LunJue 




t (Ac 



Unwd/ing J look LU> to kean'it .' umtilling count 
,-SttUnf "i fat/iamUMf aby/s o/ my imiHOrfa/ shr 

^\/v f -O / / ~^ -' 

/ Sieje t/iar biirn/rg ptwer / 

i5/ ^'//i^ /2/-M haulin terrors tdl devourir ft 



ing 

&. (favoured, roami/ig an. dark and desolate. jnounUutvs 
In. forests of eternal, deaui sn'/fAinp in hoUaw trees' 
^nli mother Enuriarmcii ! 
-j tarry) ru>t n*itn ratui form I /us vtgrous' fc^cy "I n.i l ei> 

I brink fort/i from my tteming oosom. rrynacLs a /lames . 
/intl tf>ou dost stamp tJufm ivifh a ^Lfinet t/ien thy roam abroad 
rfneJ leave, UK vo?t) fiy dcaJh ~* ..,, f - ~ 

/in.' / am arowid. ui shadf woe. ami sisinn<rry JOY 



. ..'lie .sAau bind the uilirufc. >nth on. e/frnal band. 

/e compab it With 3#arldL't!s kaneJs ? and #ha shall chertsh it 

With, imljc and ftorigy ?-*'.*, 

J 5"e it snuLe &r / noli inn/cud <fc_ my vouce is past . 





- 



. c&ist cfe, roUai her shady ciouds 
Into the secret 




ccasaL &. all & 
tficff a&edt^. 




n. Jt,mtriarinLui S-OM" Jier san.?' &. tionglifwy itSf. arcur'-*' 
tie grar/r ciuct& tJify mt&f: tf>l>(lJicr i/r. the cryftd h'.'tiSC 
-/tntl jLi&s' ater isor 0tCt* moon . /oyci in t/if peaceful "'%/*.' 
wJiJt A&s rujnirau^ s&*jr shook (Jiftr /vg^/ -^'ty 1 



'VKVCl-,. 



cite ni&ftf: is 

'jg lirlflonn takus Ji/.<; rest . 
ne/ (Jricn. unloosd Iran cAatnS 

t: a me/car in (Jig dujlufit narth. 

uJ- (tands and sfrt/ce the elcatf.ntaL . 
tefajzr of du> ( 



The shnli winds' *aJ(e ! 

Tdl all t/ie fens .of l/rifen look out ant/ envy L.05 
Steje a2i the spirits ct lift arvl ///re/ 
jhei.r warkitnb ioys to our LomJ -slrin4<> '*' ~~ 
" ' " - -ofcS-tk 



4 

. ' " 



Birui 

To ivc us 



. . 

U the- . npurtsfv-n 
oUfe Mud 



sweftf? 




IQ _ 

Cfnd Let us laugh fit war 
&e*ptsi.rtg tod 
Because the 



U Ore Irorn thy deep den. 

First born of Enitharmon. rise ! 

And >fc wi.fi crown, thy head with garlands of the ruddy virus 1**^- 
for no* thou art Bound . ,^ 

And J may ^ee thce in. the Hour of oLus my cJjlcst born 

v/og ihorrrnf Ucmon rj^c surrounded #ith red stars' of fin 
Whirling abour in /uru)iis circles round the immortal fiend 

p\^v 

Then Enitharmon down, f/ ascended into his red L&ht 
X^7</ thus her wee rase fo her cAt/nfan f/ie distant hrnven. 




cam* tfvt nltJet" or 
doll I roll 7 Klw Shall 

, Woman / pw.r 

Jluttrtth tftee / call ' 
Go. 'tall tbt tu//r>fn race lAatnc 
~JJ<at an ftterntil U/f <w>tul.f 
Jn an aJJgppncoL aboeie wftrre 
Forbid, all Joy. <fc from her c 




" 



tutrmk fatgm 

' 



oorn : teoand to nanc bu Ore : 
y Jtiajn thy &r&sy 
{ .fiest . ^/tipping upon 

^, Ji& stiver bowed qufen . 

t hVte/Te Ju&t thou. kid thy bride '; 
.sAf tn efestark ^ttctal&s^? 
my RinJtrah! brirife tfie. lovd? jealous 1 ticabrthfOn . 




,jff' : ' : '-' : ^^.':': 




r- o T ^ ^ w ^*f" n t ^ t^etl king of um . 
sf jrasi /jc the* MO/I thy uinusnereMc race: 
as the summer ^sturs m -^ 

eadL romping Jus &aid*n nton* JLile** 
" eyns- reiotce 



e of stre. n gk O Rirtrak AnouS 



mthamwn slept , 
hundred 



_ f Man wax a Dream 

moht of d/a.ture and t/ietr harps unstrung 
j slept t/ middle iff her nightly -WP . -H , v 
&hteen hundred, years' . a female t/rtcap -^ 

^^^ ^ ,-s.j ' . 



of men ui fleefirrg bands of on the 
Divide the kzavcns 01 JZarotje 

jJLliions Angel ^fntcten with, fuj- of/i pLagues "fled MtJfft his 
tLtud he.ars hard en /ll&iAitsr ^f/iore ; - A-V 

FiUiJ. with. tmmorCaL demons flf futurity : ' ~ T ' 
. cou/ici/. 'gather the stmJten rtnfeeEs 1 of /flbuin. v * 
tc cJaiid, Sears hard upon, zfae counctl Jioase : c/own. 
On t/t* 



hour t/up- lay buned beneath the ruinsf or that hall , 



u- un 

ut as the stars rise from, tlig salt Lake 



(feicloufjrd by the terrors 











*/>etturorl fher rase Jtvai tne Lrtakl: nuns silent 

/*J* r" *~* ^( v / / / ' ' / /* / 

Jhe Jlfty J\tng,* f no ypitgltt Jtts one tent tenwlf swpent-zar/Hfl 
^Muxt Jfartehefr out its diaub hf&th a&itt Vie Island 
JtounJ. mot rvlld stiff c/eiufy et nJar; silent me /ut^el , 
f tne i/uinitK ffno/vs 1 or Jntunesr -to golden rerulatn. . 
Sfmttl tne t'eneredle hordiAy inat Jufe/L-toiHerin.g rear 
J/ierr 0atc~ surrounded pi/buy, tormd of m<dsr stones, uncut 
With tool : utanesf prenous : ^ucn, eternal ut tne netrt&isf, 

f\l* * j * f* i /'/'/'/ 7 

C/7 amours blebe.. frv knonto an earm.u>c Ijbm: in trie opake, 
rlacpf m tne orthr artM stta&, tmen Ine twe senstty 
In, etcluge w w eartti -Lorn. man. . then, tufnd the Aoule 
Jnto two xtalicnury ems' , concentraiuib a/L 
Jne euer varytnb spiral ascenty to the. hcaveny of Iteafeng 
" Were ocnefet) fwtt/m^crd; ana ate noslrJa gofeen fades sbtt 
Jurnd outward Larrd and, pctrifiiJ abcunst toe. infinite. 
^^ -^^ 



rf : tturt \ 



i^/hought Juvifctl f/i uJuiOs fc a serpent ; mat tmicn pittem . 
Jo a. devouring flame ; ajnd Juan- flea Jrom. Uy jacc and nid 
Ja Jare3f$ al nt&rf ", then, cull me etrrnal wre.tkg rterc aivwftl 
Into earths ntuud* ui rudcs ear &pa<e., that like tut ecetui 



Jfeavcn (i 



^^ r f*+^*~*LS ^^rr^^fc ^- ^^ TXI st n^ < 

^Ufu) ofernlnclrrux) all except ttvs finite nftfil </ MfSO. . 
Jiftcn *&& ine Serpent temple wrnia . tmate of innnrte 
Qjfiut up in finite retfouitoans etnd man became cut 
hy arcle. turning; C00 a -tynzttt 



^f ^ 

_,y EH/ a/roia. the ancient Gua/vtan at tne southern borck . 
TKat platted duck M/A frvfS of Uadrsl te<jf. tn-a fatf 
Ob&atre , inclosd. 1ne 'fJtwne at Mtgm~; oLlt^uc it sttooo, oerhiin^ 

**~]/lnn purple Tu>i^ery and ietrus red 'image. ol that &veet south. 
(Jncf open, to tne neafens and efcvttted an. tne Jtutnan fic> 

r-sro*> Ofesfercrfn tfiai hair and cov&vl vfttn, a Stow root , 
Tjctfntt'am tts? Sti/ti oenjeuat tntrttracnve narfn,,tnaf rotav,, 

1/7 / / / J .L 

f ^/l sQvtn& imLruxXM, rf/vuis' tnf 




enquirer to mS hrv 



9>W tk ctoueb &> fires pole rvffftrowvl ui tKenighttf Eiut/iarmi 
nouid s^wions oLiiW' &- J^andons waLLn sltU initA/innon. slept .' t / 
nJi Volume* or tjrey snist involve Cnurekug , Palot&s ^ Tfmfeag jf * 
r (jrC\m. ufiela.jtpci Ar Boole .' -feeding Jus soul^ wct/i pity ^p* 1 , 
YOU&I aTILnlti&nd Suet in. ^oam curse tne pound Jvtru>ene>' : ccmpftia, 
Into th deadly stig/tt te see me rorsn. a Jt Colons' 'Angar ' 

'J/leif bareni& Jrree&fit. t^on /artn & aged igneranre prtacn&S 
On. a. vqst rock perctevaLjy those Jtenstei that are closet. faoirbWiou 
ak dark abrupt . ct j&onds <fe overshadowst London ecty 

j/in' /ts' bangy vet an. tne roeh , mt nedi cansu/naf in /uunss' 
_jr snw tAe tStrperd temple liltce/ a/Mve. J/iadowng Ufa fsLanA dtde : 
"TJigy f>*ard the vou oF^/Hbtons Gs>t>el /<?*i6^ in /lames' of ()re . 
the trump cf tne Last doom' ..^x^ " - . 

-^^ ' 



^loore the re&t tne no^l *>a.v htnrj From. Westminster lauart fa louder, ^ 
TTit CuAriium of rAe Secret codes forsook hur anctent masLSion + ^ & 
) riven, out I/ tJie flames of Of c . /us furrd robes' & mlse locks' 'Qf^ 

AdJtarcJ. and Prc.* one with his flesh, ana f\ervcs ttms jifuff Cnrv tne/n 
With, dismal torment suit Ausgwg upon tb-xtjnd ;k* Aed f*~~' 
GroveUnto alano Crcat Ccerot: StreeC Cnro me lark afe att (Jut soldiers 
Fled Km. Jus 1 Sight : Ac rjragd /u.5 tvrrntrtts lo /Ac wJdcrnc/s . 




" 'O^X.' 

/has was tfie IwivL thrc Eurcfte 
for Ore rc/oicd ta hear tne rwu>ur^ 
&ut PaJjufnabrcn, skat nif ligntnitijE^s trencfufCD damn, his *>ida 
Aid- Jiuitrtoh Aunfe **n a/I hisf Lefeu}ny in. tfu> jitftuff deb ' / 
'. ' * *=<f < *>rw^^^-._ f ff . f^s, v ,' * 

EnJJnarman, LauJyuL in. fifr sJeef) tv jfer I O Damans tfium. 

i-i <Bj '/ / V <f 



/ 



Ey&y house a. den. every man. bound. Vie shadows' am JuLa ; * '*( 
WUfi Spectres . and- tfie madotiis' *>o* over witJi curves of iron. .' f 
flvfr ^e doors Tltcu sfialt sai <fc over ike cfttn^ts 1 fe ar '* written. ~ 
hands pf ' trfin rnand, rJi&r necks fa^tend mlv tJte walks' 
cifijens : in louden, ewe* tJt utkabita/ttg 
heavy ; ^aft and Bent: are t/u? bonus ca 




Between t/te clouds' or Urgcn. t/ie JCcunts oT Ore roll heavy, 
/irpund tn usnAs" Pf SlUbvons [jiuiruLati fus liesh. co/i&usnutQ . 
ficrtUJigs & Aust/igs shrieks &* groans Sf. voices of despair 
Arme asvusid .him m(ne cloudy 
Heavens a/ /lUnnn. . furious "* 



fj 

/ 
/ / 



jyxt Lmid Anfrd. .stejt/ in ht*ror <vuL torment- ; 
Jnnnp aT tk fast dctan.; but: fa could not bio* tJi trpfi tua 
he fi/svr'f/. prK&mfiftuHJJ to aakf. tfit dead to judfymmt 

*/ _ 




enormetta Ma&t , 

Fe'l tjvo' tfu> \truitr\- .vtirs' seenuift ttvir gravcit ; 
ff -~ J '- tkcir hctto* bcne.v in, RbwlutO and lamentation. 
y^^^*, -- -*-'' o 

^^* ' *H^M^^FV^HUftH9^^^^M 

EnaJuirmun woke nor knew that jhf. naa ~st<pt 
en. tumdred YBa& nwne fled 
trad not been. 

dau^tfersf 





for 



inums- i/ctcen or vfcztens', . haw' thau -sJu/ivst m the *sny : 
daughter hew to I svjctce .' fef thy children flock around, 
'. the te/ $h#s en me n>an>e when the evict woon drink? ,'jj e 
jJTtnujr/ c/tau, art' xuteet; af comforts/ to /T^JJ jfiunfafe soul : \j.fc',\ /fa, 
sia* 1 dw waters' warbfc round the feet: t * 




w ^ a ?..jgy a r** ? *"" - 

w ___ 'I bchott t/ief /lomtnjg tsi my 
mother? Joid ,' / ~sec thy lovely 



r/non . 



, 
round ; 



, ~ 
teoMen. rtist&f tire nu deLght, A? tfiv /{amesr of Jfflf- deluswn 



- ->-,? .^ 

my Lrcvig bird of Eden, ! L^utlia jfcJhnt love ! 
. tfie msim cclotad /W del&k? upon, t/y 

aT ^Ws- Leutiia! ^ WfT? 
t sttujug pestilence .' j see y l)Lvdunt> light .- 



Tm 




' sveeC perfumed asaenrlufe O I^cutha. 

IS tne.ji'ouJiuuiL Str,ta.mart, prince of the pearly dcn>. 
"eutujsi.. ttfo wdt trtau Jfa^e. tfy mathr Endnannon. ? 




WicA. 



/ -sfef trtee. t^sla fortn . ~ 
iQ upon the bosomeL cur : ' 
iineamcnta of tar ah/Zed cfesirf . L 

Ujitiunosi the. ^tven. churches of L>cutAa. jreck 




w .. 



iffu gt*e up ^mans secrecy ny 

twc nwmcnts hLfs cs rute .\ * 

O Thfotormott. rcbb'fi oTjoy, / ^?c thy f sak tearsf flew * 1 ^ 41 

Aj/0tlfft ~tf} ^+**r*i* ^f ***** ^*^*4*+f t+jf-.f,* ^ ^*" _*^ *^ 



j-, 

uuralatfia. . 
anai. pltase tJir fur rent fiend mtkyour metodiouLS 

jLcten. hoo/ti, & bvid^j-our houses 



af>on 
of jnp 
O Ore 







. _ . 

0*"* /tti&tntut/tg r<y fff toy 



*$ie ceasU. &r ~jftL were forth at JparC beneath ttte gofonn mean. 
tyitfanji t/i -sfeuy Or K~i)er> with, th&r untnorCai Sfif 
*2/W /taturf fsff thre' ali her pore* the enormous 
^Jl fnormng ofictl rhe eastern gate. ., 

every one fled re Ju& ^cation. <8e> Jbmtnarji't"*- 



\tf terrU>t( Orc.#hen he beheld the morrung in the east . 







)S)wt Jnvn (Tu 
<~\^S?ftrJ in the. MM 

r^ 



o/^ E>rut6arnwn , 




c/utnaCs svging j/>4 red wheels 
TTie Lions Lash. their wrnth/ul taJjr .' ~~ 1 

Ttgtr* couch upon tf<e nrt^ A> sufl< the ruddy tide 
& crtcs in asiismsA. anaL a 



/Inn JLmtha.rman 



'.* arose his haecf fie reard. in srudy truu, 
1nd Htr/t. a cry tfia sh^ok all nature to the utm&t r< 
Called all fcs son* to the stn/e of llaocl , ' 





n the LanJtf or tnf _ 
to fAe fb&lic : My ,&r/ner Giants- 

Mr ., . itjttJ T-.-VV. 
_"/. * f y cannot 

*til A* 
Entntuaasm of t6e 

&F& 



._... 
H/luitn tt>_ be connected , tf to 



i **s./ ^"^r^ii^-wi/^SX?*" 



m> ....... ; .., , .= 

Reader nfilt t* *jk 



to *>Aa*r th* Jbtcttnts lookd 



ti$r afif off". *" 



,Swt.- ^* jiAow^ttt 




jfi 



7$ Jtfaa, t/t 

MH. Jl . 

_ 'jtcusr Ok -tjiui^tfiH. . ui* 
Eve* Jnm the deptns of ffefl Jtuf *>ux 
Wittun. tna ustfatfiomcL caverns' at my 
TXere&re I ortrtt: nor yatn.tny types' -sftnU be : 
Jfeaten TZarth. &. Jtetl.hencefirlh sftali U?e in. 



near . 




n. 

Poem, isf written- 

n. Eqcrtfi. can ao nothing ^, ~ 

- less t/uttt Dtgesftiati or Stgefi . - _". 

t -%> !' r^ - ... ^ _ _ ^ ' 

m VX " " ' * ' "* "" '' ' "" '"'- " 

n - fa& Yienaff -wcr.s- Jtn&t 
a JYfanatonoifisr C^utenae Ci&e 

.Stpeare &, au. \*rUxrssr of HEtur. . 

ram- we jnotterfi. bonca.t*e q ft&ounjf. to be. a. 
cuiti tjtcUsttenxUtte jtrt: af'l^rtfe . 
&** ntotitn. or? o. truiK. Orator 

'!** out tts jni&en a Ao 
ha.*e produced a. 
. Sc number of 



Jouna mat 
not 

ytt|-| 

fatter is jftu*e<f and. ^put. into ' vt^'^TpLace t the, 
siiunbensf ore resvnfeoL ,Jor the. terrcftc j>arCsf\r^ 

A GgnXte f^or the. mi.LcC &, tfesttie ac&ty. ca 

_ projftuc , far uvferuar partsf; all are necessary to * 
eafh,. oth&n ?*)Poetry fetter of . Fetttaxe. tfif Jfufnan 7* 
JVataonsf <%re. Jjestroyd. . or JrloarisrJk.. in. proportion, ajf 

$*"*"& ancf-' Music, are D* a tr r& r <' *&*'& ' 
' ** ~ of Man. . *asr Wtsrefam . Art. and &ct*nce . 





35- 



60 



bunk* aFtAe JZamef are cfap&tt.'t&e ancient porcAns' ef^l&um. 
^en'd. ! ffifY artt ctraxin. t#re unAottttdtd sutacs , A'catterd tufan 
VZut in. injcofiarereat de.'Spny.' Cba^ndffi <fe. Oxford, te. Le*ctan.. 
drwfi among tne jAinr-f Wfrtsefjr. rant avtar ttsut aiaJnJuiifef . 

JfptHlir ef'-farsw, enlarjfaL ttitmotct ctont&tffuui . terrible I 

, -as**- ran. vWy olaod.. the Srtes of nor d affttma/f 

intn t/M u/f&ouru&Kl. ttiftlvt, fittgy ffunuut. fMtrficttan. 

' mountain. , ,t river &, <Xty. are mnaU. Ac, tfteAfrct A, dar/cend 
ait i,* a, Cfff/f jstrram . JSy usf aJmost *riaue*><4 pf> ' 

an. tf brink of Uflanf Ctdan 

*&' 3f f > ' e & ?** * ***- 
LH, t/i*vabi ofj 

tt efaaff cf jcma. 
& CbMaa*. &.EjsfyJ>t 
CUUL tA 

' f flit d& anJ. nigfa; *Or /rienctr orr antrutistttt atine*-. . 
-^ -.TMStnaefiyxn.m/rtvat-eu*.! 

vttrui immarttjf J&yf* 
tf "Oau^af- : tnto jEttirAfr 
God. t**e Jftunan. -Lrtogi/urtian. ^^^-v^ 
.* of meffu^f &~U*f : ^"*^7 

at me;t>t t&ett alf gy life .' . O 

at* Atuvf Hi/ucA. tncmglea fxceetwuHy ttfyn tne rock of ajfeoL, 
... itx of ftte IttuMir^g of (fnljjfMOvJa.. St. bf tan terrors of Enfuthan. ,'I 

ul {*. Jfyte &.Co6an. arJ6*aNtag.,piacfar. JRrereain, Sifpd &. Sfuitun. '; J 

frttf tKrrcMte jfonsf tfc cfa&tfUt&Gisy at rLl&uJtt, ct/td> tneir ^ 

letd.'JGax . J&tope and Be nren. J rewire 
furtuue cfLos: be/art tn etu/terJi 

to ctffeur t^^^^i(y'Samtm^af''CUiien. 

faed. into JfeUt aft.ffS^f 4m*m? after. tiau. 

apreoel abroad. . 

'ate ia a. fmavye. df AeiyU. ; -the J l eau*e if a. lioiden. Loam. , 
tAem ar\ct tfuxr .ruadung Juva' p>>ertitntlm- J iigr , 



tneir &p 



unnd as, fictions .' ~*^ 



'n London^ dojwtfsat; nqd try ceonr JcM, day and. 

/pan Ae Emanations OTJuKanir \5ituts! tJtf jpougfa 
r ttficitntty rfmemiurd, tut not* contamnd ajt 
ufjfl in. evesy bosom tJtfy contrail pftr Yig'etatii 
are united, into ~KrioX- and. A*r Siaterssr. on . 
ef <fc G*tru6>ttn <fc GuoKnn*. <&. Cbrdet/o. <St, 
tfase usutad otto Jbthot u* tfa.Covtruyg (^us-ubm i 

tJU *-J 1 "2i& 
^sf af^VMMt, 

"web*3b*f ef- 

wMC 



oKtf tnto. 



for- ftfgr) 

&tutc(et& #o Volaufion. the fttaurOxuns . . 

'. 6y t&erweiictzanJ of tnose Wheels tfie Cfoud of smoke 
and, Jieruyeuetti & viUa. viKtepina in. tJut .CioucL , t 
nm: tftto zae CkaafLc void.. Ulmenevig *>(tji /or ^SAadef 
^-Albtan, . mnafiff tXe Se&rcr Meets; 
rtn, Jar tte Soajr &. daugtetmr of CU&iatt. 



JjurjtfcCr* <4ri<ti 
CoaAt afr**in rr\ 

f* m ^~ . . - - 



AA** Emtinartiem afoutrif. Aif -S 
r-r,u- 



f -S/>rftre tU.to t&Vta 

' strut tfy .5p* ctrc ft*>o<l 




ur <fc extended fiainy : 
to trie. opaJce butcfanirig 



., tp destruction. 
fs-iernttfttfi ? 



e Furnaces. H/ 
necessity to Aeyt 
'. wim. iron Jgp*>er 
tn. woe. fc fear A* MW ^*m 
Ml/ure LuvaSt ttttar cioycf; ^1 
. . _73?^ Jte *>a& tier Lrsvah. . 

fttias ix. tz. 



-{ram t-ju> Flts-since in. a^ cfoue. Aut us. 
ftt/MOOff, 



.3itA cire t6e (f'ennrattamf of tAe Gtaaf 
aM> af^in. to piutisA t/iee in. thy 



' I jfnomt JUJt t&iar,' J Ana* far 



jutt/i tUvttteft nut . tvtcf 



_ ___ _ 

to ~bf irritate ft i Aut' <oa% 



tam *. immoray 
? Jtutst Ae u/uttaf ? 



O my -Spectre 
2,aatA 



upon, m* 
erterauanrf 



icA. n"(f sneant -far &te ftea 
. tui 1*e tune of the End. . 



. . , 

oat as accursed. 

palace* : 
Desolation. . 



ofGfocl in. 4 

to place t/ue. ~.-- -~ - ^. : . . 

Ats Amaze : -svqrn of otnerjf fe. Juruttus prute i 
to bar* af~sfevi. fe to iron, rvcfcy beneath.. .t 

Jetf-rtgnteougneSig u/(& ylnirCuHnas of me .norm 




. 
. reacting to &*Vteavg 







e pJieruJ> at tfie ~7f*e of f*i& . aL*o eA* Serpent: . 
t born. coUct tn fAf *rcutfr tAf DraOnft-L^t^c/i- 




{"-^ com/you sn 



tSigy ever &~ 

om True . t&au etff 

me . 




SO 



S5 



60 



^ne^dfe^,4oH/ y / o^ < at5c . am* si*Jer,'nf*er.'Ji6t^c iAoa. 6t& 

hall tAai 



.. ..--,., . ~-..<^ ._ ^<^25^^| 

lejcian u$ fAe jyttr/mejty ^+^ 

a&are 



of an* e 
Af sAO/4 
Those tAa 



?..rAe 

? a stcves- <zy 
GDrsne-nttsc. 



*o Lor LSI secret wii 
Jn. Aff eCfLTAfte&S' <&^ * 
frt. *sta*i>inii OaJjt frojrt ~-~.^^, uvjw* ~~ 
j?ij*St: ets a red Gtat>e aef^bloocC tresnbUft 
SuSffenated oyer Aer Ae^/iu^-Jic. 




6e cut __ __ 

. tarmcjntJect 

'Aspav J$r ever A. ev&r. 




& t4L&i Aisgryang &. Sear-jr. aSy <&. . 
e SjOectreus 'Jmx/ze/s Jrpm. Ais Sue*, eui/uu 
in. gfiruuxg agafuas in. Gireas:&6cfl4ngS-.'<Sc. 
Cfo tAote. to SA^&e/c/: ask Aim ifAe is atA tv if An if 

'fUJCJn.:*r*i'i&. f&LSuiAifn. t/ttv sAt^erJ'. *>A\*?j~e dk.a 

r t>tf!fista; qafc f/osrg. ^.SAtcfyatd^ eAey ore tny sniniytKK* . 



, ,-a. e -n 

J[ van. Juvte etls'o as *feu- as 



tfau*der Juxu-^r* aJrp 
. to outlet m. J\i/tgetq 



ly and. itirt . *ntL anunqt 



f'oar FtZttvu-iJtuturf! Jirftarakm. uf*r 
nk MMi ChiUlrvt. aTjeq*on.. tr dffiU 

X *1 _^. r XL. ,_^. J , _*_ 



vSXcurt* . di-rf- / Court Aff uttoa tn* Pettier 4 
/Sn tnust^ *&& V * oar~/CUxnf; nd Aer; 

Jar 



^eartlff in. dtrolatfd plaaer. <uu 




r -x- -i__' ? +*iw*cs- C^-a^^^^B 

snACt snf uitr Vie Mtfinter of fiuptan life. 
+cft rcffiasu? or^outn. .and virgin, inrtocejtcr : 



Vata 



^J^L 



\rj&cn. i 

,~v*. tuft fone&ruig art fve'l ; 
at Htapv , among 'iiy tttyALyig 1>irc# .'A 
fyc/ore tftf facce of tttm La/tie. ; ^fl 
tn Aia tot* ana. ^f*toet 

in A*>r Vt 



\*n. vfintvr sy&tafaf tte 
of Jfuf. 



/* 



2.0 



1 tnourns 
t&stant: 



.. on. their 



'GfttS ***** ' 

tftx 01 the 

. jrobt for &caraty h~ . 
Jf. jnamesitg ov*f\ atiff over : 
a3 t an, a. thread, or jrcrrow .'i 

'TK fhaatf ujf 
aU, my 

&&>&% 



TtsttAvre anan**r< witA. salt txeusy over tAe fer/^s ' 

^ Vata.. ~>Aat:,ief &tn.J t&a tAaa. ^sftau^tfr^st afief , v>ee/Ms*f. . 
U Sitfnf or fAf 9"*x fovS Jcru&aZem: W/Lot- M^w .6itt ct utft^ 
Urra/^fe. fnitC . that t^f fQOft. lcf-fft.t>en, S J>ut:jnjtriCX LV nat a Sin. 
- p&r nor. to** ^JcutijL fofyi^vy^' O .' iff have ^Stntu'ct 
yfv* it ptty n*e.' O.unfolct Qyjfeti in mersr _antl lots* .' 



not *IK ttftif anfSf. Ae/avcd Vtrffisi 

not my Ln -fy nZ / Lpy e '* & gfr&resT brauttfffl eiaugfitmt: 
tnof JSub Qcr ff'tt human. .Tar/n J stride our &trtvr en. i'ajj\ 

/uirfot; rtjMw^. i wt&i aft, tfiau TtatKt tuuu*/tt *ne tn tnc. bands! 

tst .to tft me jfo; Si(biant>e/teleL tAr Aftrt ' 
. aVfy ctunf/uifss . bctufCtfai t/iro ' /iff}' ^" 
n>U. jsnunr jfctA ffty /jrigfifnex.*' in tne ey*f <f,/fCbua\r 

TCftn. 



broke 



JSm^ttt^Sifif. 

tittteMtt.lajft- 



ttrU'/t. font*. Ay tny dtsert 

weave a.. cAajOE 



/tcC Wttn. trie, j 

t \fcrtue, far tmeirJS 



Jum, j&om, rny /tresencft 



sfpretfrfatg Aer jtoarlet red, over J& 




JSerrtva/sm. G&w s'frtec&et A**Jta*utiK*un At Moa 




10 




Z4- 




fOS/71. PVCC. OC C*> C^M' ffm*fTI*f flf+w uz f^IK \X 

^. controvertetl . jari* etnaveC &ve 
^eatt. ~nfte, Kafygutftaf\Je.su&: frte/rtZu* 
isng^Go!geP, '3&*J*'icAeetjyi/llttt'n 



75 Pfunrofe JftU. ajvt ^au&Ja*Mr WffZ 

Were Auttttect over *& oJfarjrtfgattC, 
^4tut utere Jerusvteat& JnUeirS sftooct . , 



tJLfX. *Jr- ^fcAT (T^* ^MjTJ ^ . 

. -Spts*? tt> t^ty Love : 
ffy^peeene toTAyfear, 

__ y* jVt*?^^_ . *t_^ Xr.'. / 




"vffutrtae if -t6af ipice <&**& JSsuonf 
O crtiet .tr O i&trjfL eO&ttC : can 




IS 





so 



sz 



vat* into tn* ftfgia*. of3rotnerJu>ofl irttmy rerey 

* 



covers ntc au over, eul tnannaod. if gene, i ^i 
thy look eUat/i enrobes m*. ttooujC ^i^4 

>*&*& ftj**& *jflriM^*r .^.^ } 



. &VC 
am sicaa, tf> Sect 

tAittStui thy 
jiot fcG. 



&,taSfoan. t&kmntrtx 
Vfjt. fa Ouldmn. .' artfXou 
tnou. JVatui-e PfoUie.- tt aU .' 



Children.', art 
** J*r&Kuf!i 

: V? tnau. elevate tsitterct.; Ucfaetfo- ate 
rein. jSfOt i5c.ca.ve beneath tne /"foe*. 
H> tn. dt jiat no 



_. 

a. rib 

-nar are ftu/tn 

at become a 



, vene fbsaL.eu* 
(. fttfiif f^ax cruecL 
njd. the eldesrSton 



S8 Gansater 




asi. oc. Jus" jmmat 
trite fbur-Zoeis' daunted rage asft JkMkft 

c/tctngv tftfcr-jfUjjatufns.ut Sfa t, .___ _. -,- 

Jgfanenty eUvute^Sefor* AtM 



ua. cMuxect into J 
sti. LU.VO 



OA. a 
ectre jrafesung &cm, Jtuf apex. Scf 

or* tA* four Eter/iot Senses ff 

the JC,unJ>$ &&/>< 



cune 
g are tnetr 




^.o 



45 



'JO 



ye 
J 

a tA* ea, pou-Fet t aataun. 
ens-es af 
tartng tAe jfo-ee States ot 

jnagyofthe EternatQnes (aug/uid, often tAeir snajut&r \ 

tJsefL curton** &&-. 
cuy to e/nfFace *l 




to Be : ev*ui ctfj] 

'^-^WVK, - - 

**%aBS:i 



mtatft. mjut &i/nt , fitfc , atmnat 
tflnry MtHM/.g- **>*& *"/$. 
an. their Jm&f&. round. /TtiV 



*n upon.. 

God .' *$* ajt-ftJ vote* at- Uufftery round. - 
. tuQ tAt cloudy OatA. r*UeL J'ar cuul 



Stualifd. tttf. artf 
art tujf 



. 
trxty arru^d. at JUbions 



<A torment^ of Eternal 
' bap* 



JT orpaift A 
futrn Eon. . 
ft AT 
to trie 
ZJurtn* 



orm, 

youlr art /Lunf* 

On* . A- kf Uf of tervrr jnrr-ciA* . 
unfit tntr itu*. eur One M 



t#cj<ty-&ur in. vtftom. tAe D 



HUT* o& j-. 







faf . jrtui&'ciLf at otner-.v m At*r t><*/4 rfr. *****' 

cyi't ; fait. isAistt 4,as qexvict t/us ftvttacff tmfyre A^n 

rA+ oLf^iAfjfrff. tAaufr f>'trf Ajjf anin arnerfuvut , 




m.*. it as on. CAeru&sr vi 






utdtjiat: 6e Aem&d &ut tn. 
m <fe jnotoanfauf. in. ate 

Z?i.vuui Aar<** eirousttf t&e 



9TI 




i. jru*.uKn *-i*sn. uu Eefe/t ! atirti ur triy rvtstern. Gats ^ 

r or JSpei-ni&'.; ,t/uaf Man nduut great e^ampLe. ^3^' 

aftfnu-'d A. lavd . yl/iase aU, BenevoLesrt countenance. .SM/l 
. . in tovek- ijertt&iu^m, , cff-evt even \nn. envy , . . ' >~ - 




,. __ Laml <f Ulro . 
. wiiL oiforrey A AumAJt Oouf 
t. &u tit* & nor t> 

04/^ 



jZ^iLliian. tum<i 



tit* furnajo^ar ur jL 




*? (fottumjf aTthM <Zrv*vf*r. 




tn, cra.vutffUtt & evotu-tsig 
eclat t caftstru:tuse 3fcecfre As ur 
into DruutJlocks rousuC CanaAn Jigag <t- 

&O9OJT. 




>*ty^fan.2*>rAc can teli/Suf tsAaC /nayWosnan. 
a*e/x>**erc*er7f<tn Jrom. d-tuSh to 

~* ro^fc t* a. Itfsuigor 
U: come, and n'Af* 



A CretcUe J&- th* enred Wetndering J%a.ntDm: 
-' *]&' &JGur r - and every t>% Mot 
^IBetaoA,, to x^eeCmfflumjan. 
--..-^ynttrjfamningCMrujfmLL 

Gardafe&Setiaat. t/trdUn Xorftc On c4e irotiJReeL: 
J^dk&tdf^JLooir^/*ow'.lD$fajnnt&~iaUDQt&*dL r/ooJ 
9aU<e. weavtftg far fite inroutttH Jers 

AacKScJude vi.J/c 



25" 



/ft. 

Into JD&f &.jWcgJit5 &lea*5? Sujfoatfts. 

tnefe d^outte stocks cf/tl&ian.: O dcuu&lcters aT despair. 
the CracMe.ami In. mUcf. mebc&es' ts&jnc wkem found 
ou. Ae&t eruffo>>en *Mtn.^omuc/t. tftetnff Spectre. f^e 
erti&ae: to au&rt:tD mef>: to learn.: to Anow t 
'.' 'recollect fcAat: cfarJc &el tn. *fuity da*/ 
faftdu- ever.' a/ut *fe Joujrut it: not: at acune 



jJien Z.os uttered 

T mtrtat not: your laugft ,' andyour drortn. Jrt>t 
mast 




/eU. - . 

fer^Unt to tfte clodsf af&ie &***&. the. caJt(e and even. 
e/natet and earCn.-*^orat. arc Ats jttperiarar&Jus tort&t. 



rvsjtomte came 
anbt* at tk* 



as 
e back into t&e 






,' <><>& ^77ire&Wamen 



bc<zuy tfLe ZJoMgHtKns rrfinJ&uui Oj\'de &. unite, at touc t 
??** 3t caustic Hft&i. BfAjd GtoentfoUfi cfaufrtf* Cotn* CunetTtSt, 
Wmr; rroUnx u/> trie Sfa&ot- aflLanttom M& if^fSa* in ttntun 



: t*5&F* WS^usafan */u>ra*UA. 

ttnrL^ffia. 

vs wisGrt 

us etAin.:j5Ta;u &. Ab6an <Jv^L aver '&e Sun. 
*f sif travflaL mroAt.- *-' - *" 












t 
. '.st IVarte of 'Gfnera&tm coitCt/tua^fy 







/V<*r tA*>* ti&erty tvt< life O 6>*c&> 

^fftfC Cn0t(. fittSFf' tmttrttj SftG efat+tss t/Atu/t. 

fga.ye tS*EE**-**iSr "Wi .***_& 



. . 

6f/Sj~e sne : usttHxtt. into Cft 



Jifjft tAatt- 6ttic/igsi fAeir Ae 
*fnt **$ ecuiftts' jfikoetvuiizltz 



O L+rfS fe. &n*>u>us-. Aa.r* t6e Gocte aSlfAe Xt 
Qs-A**3t tAeif* sjc&itn*t*c>ett. tsi, et* Jvoustf 4 




e cemtartntt. OJervura/am. ut 

looked gcrZ JoSek tA* 



' SF* ""?, "p'gr- &f.#eret/>uft> never 
/%gu>e/r ofStny: tfS.rtge AoA'.-^nft 
.'affua>. Mno lanes' sn& ut. the jnacffaf^Au 




Its arms : llotA Ae nrgt.ve .\JeritSt3fm A. **t ycact fB-ity Jrom. iff 

^oUufjed. J Jiecvccf. Aty Voice in any ^eef> Ac. %t^/taget at ity dream. : "* 

laying DotA, JeJvovaA Forgive a. Debt only on. cofuittioft. that i ShaJ. 

JeiJPqyeoiyZiotA. Ae, forgive Altaian *^K 'on. co>utuuts of Purity 

7Z.a&eot is not^^^i^en.f^euC^oUttu)rCtsnoC *" """""" " 

Cf t * - * "* * *^- r+ 

O^oi iS 



*AJKi*.i*rfnjQif. tent/er Jjera.es are \-,ru,euy.jatK\jenovB> 
_ Vt&iout. Meuiey cfe tftawut: frcpe. in, tA^Ouituutal.fbr^. 
'Ji* tne-fer/fetuaL^fcttwU, -SucnKce ut. Great JLternftf; 'for 




?*J 



e a. 

-(ortA. far Leans afjoy 
&_ txzlaaer tufost 
Altvne./roat, < 
At, ut/vt&etatUs 
voice among 



rests' Ac, floods- &. 



. db to corn Jielets &. iti 



-fl&on &,,, ArnonSe. Jordan,. Anat 



. 
. An, fJu-asniem. lfi& to&Ac/uttereS'? 



, JT&- scunoMcUK o*< fne. a. 
fAad evr Le/wtd i*Jt I** Me Face 
Gocf of Mercy :OJ&rc 



r Aeu>e 

r oltnefc. or rgotced in. t/ty greaf~Seclna&an 




an. amcrj* the. &xmer of the. furnaces ' 
Ae i\>eaL 4+ oreatnei t/t )te . ur AtstBorsjfcU. utefSctrtt 




Off asna 
/A- Zaaj? 

fn/tff 

W M^yV&^Sri&i 
^t/Wa 



. Clt/Kf o 

.ut. tAe Xtufuttanf aJi 



A&0 appearance i 



te O tAiiu. jetu/HtC Dsm'tt Crypt La* 




/<? 



/r 



<-^r -' 3-- __- 

-j- _. - . /lOTXc'A. JT0C O/l. && Jftdfajf rOiffltt CrtftJ2Afl OH. 

I jfa.Vajft Jitpajise:*>nfrf, tfa&eLUgktfry ofAt^ton. Hfeeti* oU HW *_ 
\Cf Slijr.-f & (tctifi-ntionjf. SoLcU-tg & ast/uUUnf 'Ut.UAc n. Veil, of CX*ruAtsn\ 
yfyf* jfoatftiutiMf if tyipAfj-ge Eartnit .sutrufufs.^. jTv/Mdyn^j- jfanuSrl 
\SIlniOiia. cnttf Out Jnetetuii&e J/>ectsv. >Aa tr J\atJ>na4.S > t>i*fr , ** 
jTJifn. Alt tAe DaMJiAfery afs1lbi0/t. Aeeeurtf Gne if/ore Las. oven, \&l<i\ 
I Sfna. jc/u!fnt Ser&L /iff Aojy upon. tJ^e jLownf in, efreajtntt Af> vShjigs 
\jiiijfftf &cft*tutxft uw3o G.SLUJVgfy^i'torntLcA. fe a. det'cuj-Ln.fi'Tojtau^' 
[/*/ J/ancC tg Cattrt afl/it^fuS'. Aer feet: t*M> str-m&es ut^tttiS -4 
ly/vrmf Sg, flzftLienfe . tn. Mr L,ocky: &. tn. Aet 
\stsveC fir*. At tn* Jaun of Cine.? 4t,Jfat*>nf A. 

SAf crifyLJTytf^Ufnan. i* hut a. Vl^/vn. &, t/ipu. O SfttL\.j7i 
ZkyjfeqrfttmU*. t*. /Vtuf.'a. Areeaer a/^^Stxtf. a. Son efc Sfu^Aan. 



t SlutnaLn. JDivL. 
yyusn& fiytut 
mu tnf S& 
'Scsna.n. -svous 

rf.tAait 



>itri tnJSattCe 
ouif JSasvAgujftke 
'jnr/t^fjr A. Tos\jgu3'\ 

^ tApu. O Sft*r..~77Lou. art 
. .- - -ff -- #f*f ' tSon efc SUt^AastcL. &~Lo\ 

^ft^omajtf^Aa^o^, tLVijoc, ___ ^; ^ 

.-^fA*Lr\ 



y a 
M 
Jj 



Of. ^.ffmn. cannot foe ui. tfo JM~fjrencf 
ton. (J tnou. tflvely JDaM*A6er 6tZ,u.i>aA. ' 

astc , 



. u tn 

om Jtea&o/tutg. tn* sec 



M 



etre tA* 

. on a.ccugafyji>*i. afLSin. JL. 

t** &. JnnooeSlce isito fAe 4ab Jtt. stiver at 
^Sin, Lore if Scsel/'txrjtat. 
uio AJJT AoJWn. 



{Aen, tfi*f JSo r 

fL.teert*if> *>ttA j>recwu. ytoney ^ gottt . utjzi Garments 

jt wept vi. aUfcuUy HtfeUn. of tfi* Spectre- in 3ef-conraa. 



fA .7<?a/o 

csi the Art/to' 



Cave 



a gcn* 

k* 5 



s4 tau-/c J-fer/na0Mrodttf tAfy Stoocd jfccHtntsttt 



*r\ 



)* 



'fnff tn* j Dtst*4&' tff SjotneGt en. tftiR hoifuis 



lutnan. J*l cffrt^f vur-f 
r> Reunen. fied 6eu\ 
I Dff-&yJ'*a.M_yeL.'iffie tt, Afrrtd. 
'ttc Jt*tfnf>in.g /cet vf ft agon 
"J/iAt t\y* &tn. crtfn&'Ofi. jfort 



W 



f Actions Spectrf\ 
an. on*tons /tivfr 



s "f^ate.. ft A tAmFUx <&' 
.ivef afTfc*. atonjg tfa ISaSbtyi 
sU&iAn. ^KLxtsifi tKe Mtttof^^ 



'uman. ^f~fefrt-es fiufnct fiert'K ttiuhrCfitjLt.^^ 

~~*aJ<.Lng tXf Ma&ons^ 

Otasm. fit tAe crtesof Gi^entf^lfn. .&*af\ 
'7f-dfU*s . 



0,1. ufion. 



inusrg . 



o/ A*r .0t>t 



VjA+J: et\yi yuA. crt/ruran. 9<>rp '**&>. t/tf ai>e^af'^&6ian.it&Cftn4ieui. 
\ O/>entng a/ostg the VeuMy orslepAajUfi.. tf**tH*tg o>/er t*e CSvnr of/f* 



O 









<u*ax atetr zuxxt cfc. vte o&otL cat- mar (Jovenaua? 
ft. unffrd. itt IXoAaA 




AujCcAu* (At Warrioar oy ut.'t/ie Apt 



<Lm cfruftk. MfA taufaivat& 
dfe Vts-gM JH* v*34*r* 
r Sfesjf. Sty' JSyufu*eu*g. &*t*4 




CWgT" 

e/torrnoujf J^ar/rt, <x VarL 
tn eternal, torment 
tone cuter tune from. 
into 



gfvtttcr moon. &. 



aibraucesr are ( 



jtat aj*oatfious 




7-2 







CtttAetfraitf gate**. Tf^fffia, tte G& of S 




aj*-t>ent into tfo &unK>lct 




,-, ____ _ ._ ___ __ 

ctre*. iftte em&rae &, 



can. I ever again. Ae ujiitxS &S/>Kui 



vt 1 eyer agcun. i 
my EmanaJtian. r 



onEartA greater 



ld. twrntect Jt 



- . 

t* defenet Aer Jrom. 



GuUnj: fuuTLey 



aie 'JaAernttcCc for 



.r 

JesuS mar toattim femKfd femcui^jujve . 
become a.~PTcuje ^ubsvrvttnt to the. femaui . 



trt-scorn. S^ecUausyaiternata, tor/nents. 
' --- ' 



, 
!*, 'QftZfujyex x/u> 







S0 Log eri&f. ett Ais^Anviti. in. t&e Jtorri&le. ttankness 



& uiqyxag A Aowfag.'Bettot&ng 




1 for tSA* f* t&t /Uf-U 
ft I But **Vix/ Af ttH^cfaex 



cu. tt>iif Create atiutAerfiniaLt 




Ho* COM. JAaar 



* COM. J Mar my Utttt ones M 
QrAert tyxn the ieLctanJt JfiUfjfee ny 

< 3%xn, Z,oS again, took. */> Anf 

jf WaJkutttJDaatA,. 



Mr Grader tfauieter umer tAet 




euf favt in tAil r.onZtimpU^uon. 
tn+Z)i.vv*&Jrfcr 



>- A TafAeut 

JJo / strep amieLft elfuifter tn FrvtneL?.' O nt* Citie 
jjejeiu. A;tffp!sYH4$e ufi. rou^e up . Eterttarueaot. 



ri on. 
MM 

^to/yruxr A. "UrrAona. ttrafc 













,. r?& J^fert, 
UA Ay as-CtSux a 
"" "fc C/t& .AW* 



aS*tfri J3cJ>fe '. i>u wt&i. C/ui ^Vc-vvt^a 23. o^- U-Sur& 
Co J^ro/ioustee; aii -MuZ Ac JfeC r-Lfl/LGS^dt, CrySc. G retract. 
WarAjr.n/^&Ge f'i&& as**i#n ,<% 'fy/i^Cj.oLtjfly d<,/iraftes- 
settiy //TJX 




. -M^<^. O-23*c o^^Yamr^E. Moffets- ~Kf tvc as-<* 

/"ft,<A. tfuje. to our^owfi. Ssnctftstaijyfts'- majfe'Vrcs'frJs 
'*f*.Ef&y*cr 1 tst. w/ilcA. we ^X*L& &ve 
/e-SfOLS 0uF jCtorcC . 











*\ I*. '****&* S\4.l./l '".^.Y 





itf 6urytifigf 



sft fe re^)n^ turvfer o 
: cb&cetidiitg ckrtn -the 



tn. t etui-set the 
KJcettctiy 



tnto ny 
of my ryht arm 



also 



of tna 



his Paradise, 

to fxzJce swecC Sow* 



tt6tt&t.jpfttj' /and. 'af'\3t&jeufortcf i tditsr ^acfc/i'ce.s . &st< 
? cffurifigsffevari'tiil Jca'u&.ttic image af-tJieJnvL*i{>lc 
a#te. fts prey/a, cun&e, oui offering, atu art. atfosi.ernn 
"Deatft. terjtaL. in. tAe tteaensr <atJ&l>iati,4t. bdane die (fates 
rualem, Aa? J&fnanatuvi', in. tfa Jkeayens Zestfotst EieufaJ: 



' 
tfta in. Juavn..Ae 






rfci/Aif air out: tn. . 

-^ tfte intricate /ru&csr r . . 

7>fe murnutfii Jt0t. ne. Way ^sfuLcstt~- 

"> go into tfie cte&> fter to recfeeni, A Jti 
<& t UngffiJmt>wi Mitten, to tfiig un&u-.-j- 

c? n &'x'P/ ' 9 t ff *- n & af: &efvu* j - , 

jiony cFAUiuui en. cncfmf -s&tfJnn. <fe LoiCfL, 

-.' aJ&at attentive tame artful fnast-. r 
rtel jnjr wands'.' thy eve o^youf etttrnot sfatvcction, ; 
\2fcee. C&ies <rre Created y tfaJfawnar <J*JLos. 



- 

oursr <fe jfarrvwsL e^er eut& 
fo 




.Ja/n/net _ 
i-fp^munfsftetts Aneo^_ 

i/rf ffflto/-- ^tf fts-fflX< fp tftC <~ ^-. --f~ 

fttames bertea tAe trvn 

.*^. _ r ttcoDm 

me &n&tr**Ments>* " ' 

^Z^w tS^ffarrws to peuir aer eke 

&Ae tAe cu4erjroft/te /!avutae.-ZanAfe/ty'^^ 
ttn^nfiaftf t^fatt: 'tiAerp tAfy *verf Ituti is* * 
Atert* atd. &t rufM&an etfff^ fSattan <Sc.Oa/t Grcvejf^ 

H&iii'XtiSSL-^. 

r\&flCt*st J mztJf3ff~ c3C*^**-** ^-*->*v-_j r~nf *~* **+**>+ - % - - - 

^sStzviY JQrtua Tempted averspr-efza. trie Jsfaaaf. ** 

jirafn. *7erttafaZen*s nmtsf. . J?-^/B Aer ***& caritw<'-f" 
~Mr<? C4 *4u>te&ts-eA. -Here reard. Sram, Jrf/JznaL 



^Surrey 



fff-i i. 'fr" ft ruatajraa*. CVCJT t vifja^ifi je y^^ *** *"*~ f * ^~ 
ts- More tkeTitnnaoe-jtiatcm- a-Asap aTAursung asfvest 
'SartAsnZem rftUM. &ouerspt*xt^^ efatlVatlbrty 
t rye. & jLasn&et/ts'VcUe. O Ot&Uettstg cfSuAartm-Sn'tUF 



\&tt-tl4)t 



l 



^emy uyfsaf -.^<-X^,._ 

-cd? > \* 

^-'id 

-* f .^_ ^^ 



V 







^ 



]Z,otjut3buu3^ chS. 
\On jPem. 



.- 
, toccet'&tfvt. 



Etith.- 



ifon, J 



eA* ausAc-s? afcJtenaeu.;Xjoy i/ts 
' n V en - ore:Jte Aeaves tfie. i^an. cLtJBf inJu^s-ati 
^otn*jEfyete Park to M* a6nf-/totis-e& xff*ttjte-erui oe- oui. -oc/*v 
n* TJffffe Ctaffes oFMbrfaLffen fafie tAetr i*et ctestuvttLoni 

\rve Ctaatff&r * 



BY Enttharjnans J-ooms. <fe .Spun Ixvuxftli, the tSptndk of' 
jfie Jt/i5t.~27ie Jlect tram before tftr foundation, o-ft&e HI 
jjfte second . "Z/iR Tledeeoid .The ~77zircf. 'The Reprobate St. Jaft 
To destruction Jram. tJte jnotJitKg ttkitnb; . . 

.foUc*) with, nte 

&* 



,0 



, . 

f/ijr ,&ervtce tut by reheated, ans? am/, repeatipct, uttr&zties V 
t/tf Jfar 
to 6>e 



gave to 
Pftlafnaoran, 



&ntntucal attempts on. 
atett JL,osr tv 
na6ron Zftumpf 



t intreatett JL,osr tvAve. fv Jum, Fatanutbronsr ^rtxtttatit 
pf with. labour Yfearied every evening i 
tpft re/usct; and, as often Satzui offered A^~. I 



; afar &lamabLe.' 

test SnUtn ^/unt/d accuse Aim, of 4 
accusation, tftro *Satorisf ejttreme 

. -Satan. ta>oits* al ofay, it \*/usr et tAousrand \yearj? 
tjk e everusig returftMusf terrt/tecf oi>er/fz>our<i, &. astonigfaif' 
maracet jrccrf wtb a, ervthe/is (sany fatetmahron. . vjho aLso 



JttarstvtfS jPa6zma&/ian, rose : 
Jtutatdend. WctA toxtnentuisf 



weU. jny wards, 'they are af^yout' 

^-^^XS^JBSy^ * -' >>^ 

. hordes aFt&e Jfarratv * 
; &. tAe ^eritantsr of ' e/ieJFiorrow 

. ._ fygnatuat .Arjr and, re-ijj& 

jPcr/ftmsrAron s*ette/rtny fake the J^focrt trt an. ec^se^fi^^ 
&artag,^tiJt/t>w&atunsfjju&ne/sr trnef Ae's tfelf- iJztpcsttlon , 
Lftfy <% ttrdAjGr, t>et/tff a fy.fttfif'. evett- tntsiK&Mf nitnsea ct- orcifi&t'j 
& is 1 murdering tfiejust : pfcpJteJtu: I, beJwld. * **ir 
uv cotutsre t&ro' dac/tnessr and- despair to etetvial deaths 
must not be tprcactsf afco : Jie JtatA a&sfum'd my place, # 
day. unites* pretence of pity and love tv fne.: ft 

4 JMC ftictddtsnd .' and m.y ^feiww} sefVcffttsf mturd'' ^*-' 

^>V. srAoit& Me Ji faiont tne dtdtest of another? C Jvolish. Jarbeanoea. 
'd Jspg.aU. rn) r heart.' but patze/ue > my fnends ., 
. ^silent r&maj/t . rt/uje f cal Lost and Sateut, M 





of BetdaA. t&ar iwootsr the roc&ar & hifts' ' 
and. JLos <fc ^STaton, catne be&re Aim. . 
'ct l/ie Aomfes &- tne sieryantsf. Satztn, 
fbua/Kaibr<in..Jujtt, actu&gd, or crtsnesl ' 
. Z,e& trpjnb/ed.'Sfatztjns AlandisAmentB' a6na<j.\ 
tr ai*terfuy tfaz Pcdctntafiratr, 
&. tfiat C&e dtftamesr Aeing T-biaautonajts? * 
against ~Satntt, t&ro ' anrvettt 



.. , 

JtacC ntt. o/yxvscC tJt* Juu&ejff attfie ftaffON.najr t&e jfWantsr, 




. ^alamaircn , let: each. JiLsl 
in. officious brot/terAoo 
Mean, tune jPeUamaarojnsf Jtarjfe& . ^^ 
redundant, &,tfu. Hatrotl jnnfoen) *Mi -Rtry.[ 
JRxla/naAfwt> stood, ttite, Jttrangg&t cfjDemansr trembled. ; 
ijf tithnff creature*; Jnaqy et t&e strongest Gfjtotnetf. 
in. ttetrvtUct, Jury, ttu> also macMend Utie. Hildast bear-tof ^ 

well tny *tarcters t/uy as* afjvur etttyuti 




Y>9pt 3atujt, bdore LoS . OLCCUSUUJ faJaniabron 
TTtaf Jut Aadnot oprm&il nor injure? tn re/rcujvry jaer rants' 



^tftSaftvt. r&ttirnmjCf to JtLS 7*fi/Jj&/ne _ 

'Vie 7*<2te of^irtaA tue tfte easier _ Ats/i ) &<"*< 



tye vV^y af^&uX a* dte eafutf Ats/. J *ci"><*' a^ cojtfnsicn..^^j 
fact bat* rvtujtut to Lav . *ot "/ rti&t vengeance. '''*, M & ftmaf 
rfunsiefr ccn^utciaf. of PalasnaJij-tinsf tzerptfude . l*ot> beSifld' ... 



** 

*s 



astct daft etna 



_ ____ 
MMsf drunfcett. wit/i, 



placing 

: vJ/t&n. me. 3~- - , ~ 
~&e/nce stooef.t&o tirtmf: 
alsro cusne. cut ft Esii&iartnCfi. on. 
att 



^t.JZ Genii afte 
ctaL YOU*.' 
are 



jnarit un/nezfKf. 
<t blaJtk ii 
tuttmfjmtr ItUtottKf, & tfusr day 




trtourfut auU dcty tftis rrtaurfsfttL cfa-y cf'Satuji, &. fti/asit a (H'ort ; 
ffU tfie Etcct .<* alL ffte Flat leenuC rnoum'ef. one- laniard an^tAer 
tfie jnousitxtuis ofs/lAcon- OMU>/I</ the cl&te of (JiA r 

tn, te(&&J /nc&J&anE pourcL JehoVith& rtun. C_ 
Guntenci/ief Crt&i tfic rain,, tfatnder'd. above rolling 
<?vtr their Jtetfs ; ^aan. *+>ept aver JPeucvnabran- ^ 

. ieaugi': tr'ffftoie/t^' ttC ctcnicxL death, 
cpfttgrulea' a&aifLsC Safari, ui f f'cUtng Crmncfer J 
me /reftc. ar&atast a2av J'cproVd- Jtun. : Jrustt; tfteir rcpra 




ur aftfie reprobate : of tfiode Jarmo tq _ 
^ufnnsf scut; atis&csnulalian' of* jfitendst/tip t ^ 
--i pLowed. -rurjrort&. mi-g&y fed, <*{* * 
&<t <ohln, t/t, t/te &rJ"ir# Hteixgy di/sour'cC. in 
flrw>e ffutncUA . be&tdc /teat.. stoocC angry 

Aufi ta arise; Ji* rtepe.'j&niwarjyion &aj*> Jus teaty 

' ' ?.{&st 



. . 

a, bcjze &r Satan, &. J^TucTtael &*. Jcr tne poor 
Ae n>ej3C over t/teFpace,&> closet it *w>4 a. 

secret? 6urt4aL37ti{loJt,,*t'c3tu/iff disconsolate, over 
B*& -J*filavTvaAf-en. caUed 




a 



v/tlt, not- defend. ~Jrta&..*nay be c 
tfatt: he #ui be 3ntar& &. 



a 

^ 
\ 



alt JZdert' descended uto Patamabrons' tent 
CLmon-st -/ttttteng JSriucte & Bandf. tst me caves' 
DeatiiCbuch. ist tfte caverns <rf ateatk . at the corner 

t, tft. he mu/str or me Great. Assembly JMalamaAron. ju-eytt. : 
God ar&t&ct: jne from. &y &&&. tneef $&' A** 1 * n0tj>o*>er over 
"Uieu Stast- piun me porter to janrtert Jnpsetfjfv/n xny 6t&eresft 

weeds', 



it J*aafna6raJi before the 
ffe crco&xi ^suven. 



i^ of inf*ra&&tfte .; 
oat sun 

v fc f pervert the Divine Vertce in tits entrance _tp tfte cat-t6. 
tJutscder of t^ar Se, triwf>etst ^foutct, Wctn. artues 



. ., 

ent; ccsict o'- ftr J^U-^an- JKuytraSi, asui. Atjf rtaffe /> \U. _ 
t. sunf Jlatn& AtffA &,Jtcrtotis ts$ Section, aqatnjit FtUamaSratt. i 
t Aeca/ne a pr*n>erb uz. JEctctt .Satan is, among the* JFlefifaAaefei. t. v 

isi. Afsi Htratft. .cus&v jftaeutett &,eartfr. Jte s^ent up.JVatzatt& ' 
it? an Sfi6uitt& rocks antana /ugAr-s-eard. Jdrutjd temples' i 
svacft, the .star*? oCJi&aven <Ss SSfretcA. JrOtn. t*ote tc jOole .) 
plqed. cantisierrtefr "tfte oeecens? -Jfeff. before Ai& &ce *~- 



, 
of au, tkesre 



jfficre isf no ot/i&r.'i&t <tl obgy M&- f> 
J Jzave 6rou.g/i tf^em, Jrorn. oig upp 
Qfsri)' JSrterftcU. Sftsui, tr<tn.farcs stony. 
CiSf jtort I rencC tfa# tcccus\$&Qr Jfanu 



oeefft atncatst the 
'w& JDi*#t~ 
i/t*tar<zs x&ane 




._ -' asuJ, jitff bo&atn 
( the nafecC txrrace& of. 
-esr. & t/t stcaejf bcpanunsf cpcut*.; 



. t 

- ttier& World- of cfeeper Itiro WU& ejMtrtd . m ifo /rtu&t 
Qf ' tAe J't&em&ly. Jh. Sdfaftf bcsrom, a vtxsf: urtfa4&acnM6l6. Cfo 



JtelcC (Jut fssern^L>- ut, ttn- eu+lEtt -yt^tca ; asu tiearssf 

Fel cfown. ttsf dews of tuafo. &. u. fcifd. ^"ol^/ntt. tmi*'ejiya & roast 
utter'cf. -from, tfta east: &. Jrotn tfre v&fff & from tfat Sr>M- 
j/Srom. t/t startd.,- an* -Satan. sfoocL ofxxAe ttnmeasiut-at'le. 

& ffutsu&xsf UBTC from. Jtisf /udaien. nrjucaly .- ttcctc&inq LaeuC 
JDutvie JVergy.JSr jurotectuiff JPabunabran, ut fus tn^ 

rearei aft **aU& <x* rocker asulpcumt rlveKs e-jnat 

Scttuit. and J^aiafnaafon ui. tfuz fvrv'iAfe e&tr/cnttstlf* 
JSafzuT. Jur 3uzi/utff ke iSccetnct 
ffe Su/t/f ftortn. a. ctr&cu&ttt 



. 
tike. tft stum&enr 

'Zfte JSefcKzrotum. rtoef terri/Me: t&e. Head *>asr *epost& en. JSuar CCHO& 
23eneai&. tk Cbitrft- vf ' (ZZAian- . cat tAe Revest, juaucfutns cf JtotTte 
Jn, t/te HlAo/G ttlnc*! a f trie Cbvertrgf CfieritA. J&>m&ja4c6fton, <$e/j[yrt, 

' ' 






?^*t h^a &cf g*uur$t Jeruxolcsn to e/e&tryy the Eon. o 

yt .LjffJS hiff JSftithcLrtnon Jroot the Surfa 

fyort the *Jlttt/nesr who&e udbsyg hwsnnw r %bo. 

J3fitah fotit'ly terminates i-ri roc]^ Cu&ipn ' , 

ttrfrsiuf en 73y(/c JTatA . on ~fy6tts~nsf ctnt/ul. brook . 

'net the S^fttLs arSatusi- n>erf ^fef}ftrat'<(. tnfo ft. 
frra//s' the /*acAs ajCZt&totts JTefuJblesf. (tntf *SoAin 

'he jJttfttttfi Yicttstis throttffrtoict' aJL th** E,OU"fn -a/ict. 

cetiih t/nmorfsL en. sit-& flocrc . ovcf\y/iguf\v<i, the wttafa &ftn. : 
-.Sflsftr/z ftiezjftstf* to fiimsmtf Lcu*s> Svrn. hiff <?**v 

others to -^crve hvn> ut tnarot exactitude 

ttttcf &oct ; .setitintf himself above, aft that L& collect Gpcf : 
rlna a/. tAe *S/>ecr&s afwie. JDettcf- ca/ttsij* & 
fn his *Srntisg0jgu&s HtasisA&b >S(cfun. tender the Ibiuttvrt 




fhe Zrua> 



entutre: Why ui a. Great Solemn {Z&sresnldy 9 

' be carttlemfid, for the Guilty?~7h#n an Eternal, rose 

tJaytng. ffeAe Gutfay ^shaulfi &e caiwcms* 
sind. one fm/f dt Jor astat&er i tSireug/tou' 

is fcuUn. -&om. kiy *stetrtan. &. sie&er can bf 
must e rt*> Created- continual^ fTU3nve/i y fnomesat 
ire the Clafe aF Satxvt 3haLL t>* ca&jft/(eler.& 

th* ^Reprobate. &. (AaSf *xF PcUarrtaJ>rofi. the 

J*or Jie e-s rectcemaf from -Satans <**>. the wratA /aUinif an 

fhnrefare. T^ajLuma&ron, dared not to c&K a. 
*Til S'aAaa. Aad a/su/nd J^utfrah-sr tra2h en, Cfit?. 



5/te. cta+tn deecenafod into the jntdst aTtA* Gfrjxtt -Sblesnfi 
hersetfa flansom JorScrtast,, taJting- on. 

IctrA. v+>ell- my vtford^r. they are of four eternal &alvtiti0ns . 

.f" . ,-' *S - . -* 



^ ny /L&i varying 
id. tovelr.' d Jter ntath'uAe e/ei*astcc snane 



_ srtandtjier uf>on, tAe ffplcten JfaoT' o< 
35 l-^e -gpahe: / am -tfte Cfuthor afthis S>ui,' fay , 
"4y .Parent >ovter *Sa.tan Jta& committed this 

IZt/nittritx. +*im Juer scute*- arron>sr r^> 




10 



O 



kg/it t3 terrtbl* Oo me . / fadr before her immortal teauty . W 
JotA, a. Dr<i*ftm-jRirm. tirtA. issue Jrtun sny ^*^^2J^ 1 
-T//-M born sott? GtA- Jne/jAt ~>-~*^'"S 







y^ j^ t -y "jy *- m *.**n.Ji*i**-. **j-rf ** - ^ u^f M-C" * -rt~ -***^ ^ 

Ufiuarary &v go Jla/a/na&rea ; adtniraOcit J'OI/UL fttrt. 

*T&'X& uswonyuertible .' srty judt , *jA*n. of ftoart 

jstf ftorjif^f Qr'J'iibifnaAno/i. m/i jf&s* +*cst < 

7_^f>ra/^f cut arms hrcrtst aT*Sacta/i.. t&cr 

au> ray &feu&.\t/iat J fmgfst untooaffe the 

Efyruttrat, usecL to <fo: . but foo we// (Aostf tivin. 
&to was not JfovtittruL. and tfuiy braJt* vte fyaccsr 




. ,- 

pteaaraftf- cLarth 
HO/TO* 




c0cut\9 on. tAe JtiU&', 'terribly 
ru&Ad.. and *fith. J3*tt&r afove /.*- .- . -^ y -^ 
t_4jstatrijtj CD cuflt tAf Aq/vfe&f <3f. to tftr&V f>anrc& of & 
/r^" sJar/vMt tft. tafptrinfAiste warms' >~ 

< tr isrterutect tAe ftu>ado*>st in, tA/vr cotirsm 

Harrow! cttsft tfiLck rtasitcy: ^/eAc^aA- thunelejiaf. above ' ' , 

t>4 & ancient /tigAt; fled Jrofn. iesieatA- rfte ^ar^rferrr^^'i 
rias-rart cajrt &UCK flames &. vr/*ct tar r*f&ut tn. canea** fit*** 
J-feU. afcus- a**!, snaAuigr. Jtof. it* Jfa/itBf ftrt jt*iK* /** J 
t&under'd. ^aAoyf '^yixtaur, in. /iricfe of facer t ^*^7^ 
&sv0)t> cutwfto tAe c&/tifefuft0njf of *sfsii?)ti 
et t/ti/~f Dorp i/i. tAf j/vsy &s 4?tu>Aiti jv>t*tft &! soufn. 
<ei?our ^Uton, astci %ferus'<tlejit tA^ jS^naftaAan. Cr \rtlJncn- J 
'g the fjaf-rvut in Pitys pathv. 'frtasr then . */ctA~ our f/art 
t __- start girc swul u^jO etfJ'fiai tfft^H^tf-J I Artn'af tJte-Ser 
jpsTecmuSf \stajuts &,&oLd ttfrn'ctpcigons an. t/ix -sultry >a&ti 
e Gfuuvtcs Aft g# fAaf ofay sport* sttt; tftgy cur&ct Satftti oifft 
cfo unAttuf tAi/tas in Jci/uLnes& .' *>tth. pouter arauf. . tv saf 
rn*a(f ts-rituzstg thing? in. the. fnifCst of tears ttnct foi'e ** 
~ tirf (Jig stzsisfy cttAjC Scrf>efcf tAu& tfui H/e^K tAc/n; "Ctii tAttS 
tft retum- rtxzikatect . owe -the Z*ivin& Creatures 
Gsrdfnfjf laJjcarcf-. J rtewtuig hid, tst. "ZSntattar inmost 
.. Htne/t t/t Gnomes fefiuf&to labour more, wttA, 
\.came fyftA, jfrom. the fa& af^atan.; back the. Gtvmc? 
arid. caUe sne Sin,, and Jcf <t 'Sfi&n- f>o/-te*teus Jidft me. 'S'oon, 
Day ^tutJt oJtd JPajLarrttibrvn relztrfiB, tr'em6&ftjfj/tu ft 
Jst -Satanf itintost Fa/ftce of Alar jtervaus fine wreugAi ', 
f*or JifSKJft?'Lfi, nmf -Scttst/i wifft ft^f Aff - ' rfjlt f?' r ^f* Mcwmtft 

4errt&c in tAeLrjgy &, jzourifig' wifte of Wi . 

Gfr** Siafttst t/tecr^ wine : ins/ignavrf erC tfte. frurnLng 
*>itA. /aropAetic Jusy Jt&s /prmer ti/e fmcnme like, a. dream ' 
tft tJtc Ser/>cnts folftat. at <sefaA. Juttuie/s demanfyifr p tt/ ~& 
^.-^ fnoast (snpuj-tf, jfelfcande/wttt to ftterna/ tnansr. Jie drove 
J^fe trn/n Jus insnest Jfreun, &, tAe ffoosar dos< *tA HUVU& 
Dtvutf Vt&tan *>ho elidst. create tA* Tcrn+if : to repose 
of RtulatfL,- pity tAe ty!f>e*ftecnif' L fut/ta. f 




erk Cctijcb. f,insr tfte . ttttrA 
~Ihe .Stntre taJST 



20 




me. 

. atui &&&: Zeor Jar tf-v. 

t^ct/er re&ffa- to die dk- tntirtde he. Jwrsook . Jus c/ucrffe 
tstef etcci*tt J^TctacJi . cuut "n^n-JWutecfi *v<zar impatient 
ivrJie fvxAd- '.fcutfirt, tfa jfo.v2,imits rst aFOpaaly. Men a 
*?as ttam*c Scr&in. , Canfraetton. **w* jnarn(? Acfatn. 
6)Aun came : EtaJu/n. vjeariext. -ftuntf^ .they elected +tvtfa 
. FaJuuC <fefcefuit^,J^nAfui terrified vtey t&nt \Jefu>Vah 
Mas leprous; lom he, ctiltH. jtrefcAtna ALsr 7><md t Eternity 
.Far tfivr t&c JBoefy ofJOcutk. *>a penfeclxcl in J/sypScri&c Aa6Jte 
Araund, dtf, JLasnZ. <*. &mjxr jTacAcrntzcte **vv&i in twiettrorts 



so 



&to/t. Aejftrt^uj^^et^isesr 

..__,., * f/t- ttlt g&JtxtJt. As/fare the ^D -, ^ 

so trut j&tcA-otte .&&$& it/not- s-ftaH 61 fjane. June., to tysfcorc e 
catty trie J/tcftVutuMl. JLat*, Motr. anil ctesfpisesr,1ne SSanttcur. 
yrhg to uvtoUe StlAions JBoefr uTjKresf of cfersut' ' 

JLecutfut aeeuset: tea/tsr &}tct: Atek tfa. DivincPtty 
is sny fiu*te; Wejzre tfte JSfatctre toTZfUVaA. tne . 
GVala,! " 

M 

rt*>o 



. 

tf tc&un. tx, JStsrstUy anct. fiU lot resrf- to Eternity i& 
rsij&ar meet tDt(e&ier, OA.'to&t / tost ttosfrf Jar ever J 
Q 





Aa6tess r J 



/ aTjFree Gtft aricL &tecuvi that . we tine . f~~*^- f - 
A. C"ruet GfooanefsesfiJiuise desffrvct JEterytal JDcatn. . 
>eep upafi t/te Jntal Jorook a\SfU>arts /wer.X-.!!?^ 



\ut E(ysii*&-ut tnet- LeutAa tfi &ej5lace vtJtere she war /u 
r Jtct tftj~e& usufe Aer arrows, cmft Uud' down* her sre>uncen& J3o*v 
S/M' ^ootficC her *fe&i >yare yards <&. brouttAt her to jPada/tuUirvns bed 
In jnatne/i^s Stew cretcte-a fijr <teu&iort,. interwoven round, ah out . 
Jn, efj-cattts -sAg bore f/ie. jftiadogy Spectre afg>?fj>.&, fKtmd/umJDeath,] 
Xn, drear/if,' jyfic Iture, RaAti& the ntomer dT firgeih &. her ststef&i 
JJL ZjtLmSertfas' vtiles ;vi Gurtbritttfe &. in Oxford .places cf "ThougSn 
InfrLcaAe taJjyrSn mg of Times afLd^jpaces tuifcnortn . t/uxt LeutfiaL^lu 
fjt PcUasnaJbrotiS JZnt:. euid Oothcon. Htosr her cAurmtstg guard- 



( 

71m J3ard. ceaxrtl. ^ttl c^nfider'd and a LotuL resounxftstg mu 
Continued rwvzit tAe Tfattft'OruL jnurJi (far qutsTtonaf tile vns 
Latu vou:t Bctrtl. and, tnttny condenuifC trie hf^ toned So 
&a.ytsig Pu\f anit, Zieve art^oo venerable jar tfte ynf>utau> 
OTGtStt. Vtfierj jtaicl. If it tv true > vf 't&e aetst have ixxtt 
Let. tfte.Bar( Jumse/f *>ttne/s . VMere Jurdfft tAou tfas terri6& 



Bard rejtfiect. 7 ctm,Jnsptr<xt '.' 'J ' fowrt it 



.! 'Ja 



of t/te JP0C&.C 



the 

etersccU aff 
be Glory &, Porter tie. 

' ^ 



Ef&rjruve Ainen 



^Tartuty *Se. jKtszjctestxui, <fe C'fusttt &> tp Great- Ctsnere^ct 
acJ&rtgr ms J-COtsr cfe fast jG/t/tefcafwtiy uf tt&Earth, ia <ioute/ut, 
*i touat. vouxz- J3atri terraycC toa/t setiy*e in. J*fi&pns bayo) 



to Eterstttt. JJeectk. 
a6le G<xsr ctFJ^r 
jrcJtnacct. avi&vu&ctitt cut/* 
ectuvt, CQftte. 
C) wiest La 




~tfte juwrt<? tar uact, LST ^wc/z^ c=rznp Jnistsf dc. &harta*is, J 
tfie j'eJbulc/tefisr in. clouds' aCJe/tcvafi &. Windsor^ 

cfo f Jte/'e He/ot'e the<7ud#ment?H>r&u>(-rj,.- . 

tfte cbuumteny arjacmarr, &, net wetA. tte f&uy&isif ct impuvtm* 

Jf eft,-tn}' ycXf&oott cxtn, tfu3t~^yaan. ;J<trn. tntc. Evi CUvsf 
r ~* Lsr -tny S/>&tre / in. jgr o&edienee to foa&e Jitm, Jrvxn nty-ffaftsr 
c&um, e/u; Jfe&St /np JQ&nrtajCei?, jf^o to J&temat, JJedtA. 

took ene outa'tdte course, among t/te graves' aftfa cecu 
VE/i/ ^Aadtc.JE'ferst/ty sfa/ttderet a tAs tmtye tyeZfma/. ' 

verge of BeulaA, Aeoefuitct, JtLy OM 

Jor-jn. ftaubte : AertnapJirocfitncj male 

**'- o<jcf . oncf- AG enfv^cc cno it 

&r tn& ctneacC ~.f/za*0H> , twe 
to 'tfae. cfapttJif of 'cfcrttst Xell, & tAence 35 ^? 
iff this iMrtJk. ft/ 9 i-^0cfztton. en. wJttcA. ftort 

"even: ^/btgetsr a/ fne. 7*reseftc& -w 






3f 



fl ./no* cdrt-asnsr. 



budy 



; they 
Jiov> eira 
JJivin* tAf ctarkf>ru ; an^t tfao H 

asrd. tAe S'even. coutJortaa- and. 



_'tc 

GfJuf 

fjtten., < 



Jtt 



a* // 
tuf one 



L9 a. JtyrfHtt tAa yf.gmcut&s beftetttA, tAe 
, saw Jus sSsieudoHf vegetzzfifft . uiuer/ieaA. t/te 
deatA t Ji>r Hl&an he Ssttcrct into Jtif ^Shadow; 
fiaf WWB^ a/uf invrtortul, Sfr\' **(*& *&. ct0f>dtrc(, to 
" i* uttsrtot-tnlig'.. fts Cng 

1*. emmar-txutt, -- ^~ 

s *-**- '^roanal turn. 

isi. JULST cout aru efisn 

in. dreagr 




kept its? coivje among the ^erfrrjf; ea/& 
tyf l*cr/ttnutG jycLfz.ytft^ &m/n. . ^tofnscf vtt: 

T Aim tst. a, trat2. arf^At: cur &F ex, comef" 

travels into C&ao&;&c J^fi^fon. vtetvt &i&arc(ec[, witfun, . 




or t/tft/uty iff 

njt wTiest, once a, trt 



cet every tAing,JiAs 



1'artex ; At ttercieveg ct roU. Aacfotartf d&fuJto'- 
. into a. gto&e isreT ist&lttin& f \ 



LU-ue 



jrust, 

' e Ac&cpsf ctirtarcte in, Jiisr rtanSivug tourney on ffic eaj-tfi 

ft JiuJtuzn Jcrtn , a. Jr-tend, tfctk. nvjfii -MAom JuTlivd b&tcyoleh f-.. 

tfie eye afsnast. penis' ectA due Ctaet: *, Wsf dtcotnfrasffi/tg 
vorii&x : Ofud. tAf ftart/i. ft, j&u&t.wit/t. aJj tAf if -sfowV Juatt ; 

cotYL-4iielci& ahcf. Jvsf vcUt&fcs' cf-/&c /ut/u(r<. if-riV , 

&f tfi eaf^/t. <ut trtnsttfS: ittftB, tt/td Jtd; 

tfie weak tfwetfjer can&ut beneath, the fnoeuty ^ 
tfas^&tiaveri a. varG&c passvC. 01^000%, anet^tfae 



ptissct 6v -&tc treuheM&r 

' *^^ 



A~& 



\fi. fDan- 
cvta < 



^v^r/7 ^Jr*" "> i **'** > wx **e/jr^ c-t'tCC, 'O^uufjrt *.^>v^i~u^* 

frutrO: Satvn of oc/rfcctr bec^t* oettsftreCchcl, on. trie. rec. 
jrof^snn. dea&t. , trie *Sea. of TrcJne &, SaajCf tfiusuferat at 



t&e rvcff. wus-A Hfa^f est**ifver / f>&/.'*>ux. tfa nteee& 
orer t*e ct&t bajfctn. . ut. tts vertex J^fUtOft, bent 
tne. oo&tun ofaetztk. HmaLt was- undcrneoct/t soon, seemb 
ctoucfy Jueavea. jnrsi/eaf wetA. ~&tonrtty seaar 





that 
on. eartA. in. stiff 6sr 




ffteir eavstit &pAefesf.sic> tjuma/t . t/io' tJte/r Axhfs Pfmai/i clps'U- 
the darA 2/tfo tiU, t/ie Jitd&nent:: also Miltiin knew: t&ey and 
'tnsrelf* vtas Sfuman. , tAo' JWH> rtattdering thro JJeat&s? Vote &L 
.. __ can/uct wvi/4 ttiuse Fttmafo r/nr. vi/ucfi. in. blond <Se.jeu/4>Ltgr , y 
J&ei/vou/tt&id Aon. dtftt&tif &, usiitzsuf rtie/tout end. or nttmher.^L' 

t&e Cruelties?, of t/rv, and Ae wots tfaar doMt. V 
abtetg: tzad Ats Wings' s JDau&ntw-* ttasruif were t/rese 
nd 7is*a&. &,J%fraA &e Jfatah <A; JVoaA. &. HaglaA. . 8 
sra rantfti rau/td /u/n cat tAe rvcAs- itfSJoreb rvu/ic) tine la/id\ 
Canaan. : arttt tfay n'rotP T in. tfutnder jrmohe astd Jtne 

ctictate.; aaefais &Qay n>a& the TiocA -St/iai; tfusf body, i 
yt/as' on eastt. born -to cars-option : &, the -sijt. f&na&s \ 
Cfre J7ar &. /fear &: BasfAa/t Icswartstt. &e,J^cAaLnon <& tfcrawn I 
S'eyen s*ocAy jxuet&sg terrible in rtie Desttrts ofMu&an.. 

jBttt Jtytftattsr flu/nan Sfuutort cottOfiudicurtifYvur ttAoi'e 
trtft&es? <2/*2&e J^fundiMie ^SAell.- ut tft/e 



ffuxdane 
d s&a 



arc6stt 



tffe 



. vast' Concave Eart&.:an. 
a/'a things upon t our Vegffaite 

istto dmension <&. deformld into isidf/iftite space 
A. Jfetzvettj cvut cUi t&eir ffetLy; *>itA 
It 



'7irt&sc/uzy wh^re tfr &zf-A. rrtausrey 
Jn. that Jleiafi calM.Jfidiast. atrreftg tAe HocAf _ 

to Sfatims jt&tt 
to 



the Ve/iuiuiar> terror >eAef Aitn., &. dilute JinaAarmett 

, __^ al Aer efcuu/iefi&, Sayvu/*~SiLrey to etsttoase ary band- 

^J& t&i& Man. came.' Satusi JzAaJU, 6e unleasa. upon. 

' Ji&evd in terror jEnttfttcrjncns' -M/oedaf,- in. 
' ' ti/oe roots' <&&&*& atfcu/ut 
<ou*/te\ 




ta 





atro rfrvAenct jdf brawsr: J ree)istg dark, rocks &e _ 

ftjji. anaC. tftfotvuf defp the. feet in, jnarble beds : 
r i/&art utbocn-ft weSk Jug /auraey. &, fits Jeet bled, sore 

1 stow cnetfiftld to jttarofe.' cdsc Lfrtjen- rasfe . ~ 

an tKf* j&ircf <*f ' sZrstan ; fc. &y the streamy of the brooks 

. <fnet: . tend Sfucm, fgtroVe. among the 
ja/ujwajjn. . M>/fcyx. tfcffi. cold, Jiand^ fjj'tji 
up wafer jfratn, 6ze^ river Jfardast, ' /o*-"^ 

- brcusr. t&e icy JZucd. from Just bread, ^.y^^ ~^<*n, , -r > 
, ^^ . CDO/C of the r@ff. clay of-SacevtA. . snotiain& it wdn, care 
Jusf poems; futct Ju/Mtf* up tne /u/trov<>& ofjn 
& tfre &et of Urgea. , and on the batteff . 

ott tAe JJe/non- cold, and ouddtftf* fiint,. 
a, ffiu/rtacn. &/vn- &t th& Valfey afJSetA, J*ear , 





^ffm*. iM UT41 mtiffl, , mftftcu, ^JltYUSt, . i*s/lf, rv me rVfSSfC. * 

jUtey we Me JFbur ZZoeu jfuzt: stood, arcutut tfte, 7 
But \vfayt ^JLttt'aA. a&s'ivnd. tfayfor/d of tZrgen t 
f^Lttd ./Uoi'an. was sutut upon, fits' ttiou/ttiu/tsr, &, u 
Clft &M. tpHHXSvte tft Center tn. dire ruin, -srinAin 



ICtl/Z, m^ t v*.fc^.fc*^ _ . ^-STjg* 

utn. name.a. Urijeat? 
-named. 1fiafmLS 



TXt 



'^r^ 

ftp - _ _ _ m 

2/e, ftlf. t&eif Se&ug' to efface Jvtif&ffi' across tftA 

y%e*jK<>atdl Jaraa- Jferxiia/xfiredcttc; and t& Uott6te-&ex.ef('; f &\ 
T&e femszfe-#ude. <S* t&e. Jfal&-jetna/A, <s*&-<#><xt"t# ^&x>a flf 



vt, ctocrj:ne&S r ,gt 
G>t. 



etpart* the eteeps 

/ behold. jJie JKe/ig& of] dinaasi. / 

^_ ~Chtujt~a? *Je^Uy$r Los 8*JR 

j&e Banter ofC'am.t.ccld tearjungsr ^trSanis.-JjOttdons . 
<atn&tt: upott t+if winds of ' JZurapK in. Jlepn.atJiis'. vale 
- rexc apart ittto cc. desolate, /tight:. 

_ _ -^ Jar /tf bread- &. water among the fi. 

?re/aFe bs-tgbt jTirJaJt. triif.fttphs',' putting Cm. cUL beMrtf. 
'tfzan.. in. fzer crttei &porte among tne/vtcams'. 
' ? Jerusalem with. so/y*& on. the Green 

siu/n/teKSf her: ^ 
ere .it: -"-"' 




Jft JVa&vdl 
jLet Jusr be 
jtumbt 



SAe jt 



every 



"*? 

^WKere~i&~fKe Lamb ofGodr'* tMuere ts' tAe prpjntse _ 
jffer -s/u+dowy -Jftsfiexs jfiirttt the bon&sf. evert the bones 

tKe jnarroM/.' and tjfre orbed* -SfCiuf, ar\ 
'L& Jsna0esr are born, for 'War: Jar?ctrm.ce to 
J&ttt/raL Tle/igwn..' &> 'TirZfifc. the Zjattynter p, 
e tiesr ohe knar: of neryotiSf Jiir-e^. into a- *y*<f& 
a - ties' t& J<n0t of bloody vwstsr, into ft recL not 

CUbion. tZesr 
if 



- .' 

iron, txrnuiur. be/are 
cnto 




Seven, (Zngets of 'the Pri 

QJ*ff*> catt,Tgit/i -ayr &&& tongue that clcfivetft. . 
^fetl..<nrt^ F0ttr^SclJ^asi..tJt,^ftar.ry rzusn&enst Set 
Qr AQH> ctvr. J witfi jny . colof. Atzn0Caf*clctY.'JBut; 

ftte G& tKOit ttfUt/Jtrrji an 

c/ut&e to ecC * worxn, . it . 

jzortictL . 




bat cnf; 
e our ~r/ve& ffA 
then, to 



vt trie 




CAW &-S^ 

<cUtc*!& O Aetoved of , ^ 

2 lAfne. bands' of War & be tfiou. . 
^ in. Jtagor where the f Twewe Jri&eJ 
\o spoJce .they. q& in atte Vo& : StLztiC JWf&ut &&>ocL 
Tie cfarA&in. fjr&en. ;asr &te tfcufrtor &Unt. -slawl? 



t .ffuoa. 
in. 

. __ .^f &t C 

recif. Huma/t 
ctar/cencC ; ancC 




rolutct, 

rtpstt Urlrj&t *>A/2e h.Lsf JHot^at port 
&o-' <w* sus -Recteentect. portion. . 
cst. ; but: wttfasi. t/uct ortion. 
in. power atui jncu& 
rgs>'es 



fc Aaty a. 



etre 




0/1.5 
t 

* M 

to tlesyt. uuofi /t^f Couch 




or ev&y Jutsn^ >^ - 

ytAcA-Jifcrt currc tffibw 6 ecctuse.. abf.cut Q& <&. CLnaJc. a.t 
' '#Zc ' aw. eacA. jfortui6 Arson iy y/aust anct, tnoa&t 
attf O& &, fjCfia/c v^atcri- here.! fiare. 

ft tJt, is vVe&sf.'J&r tsi. braisi ana. /u>arT 

^, open, 6e/t/sict, Sfttetsts Sfxtt to t/te City of- 

; ft tsf tfi ^pirLtuttl jfour&faL JLd/ufon , m, tne Cotsis" of ^t^At^'t- 

Jfifitto/t &/, A#o ^U&ions fteart. frafelliisif* arcteide. of 1 ' f-fit. 
&te -Stags' tst. CVtacSf i<n, Ccr*'ern& nr 

JFtepnafsr rope y 
't, burninfr f*o 

;; \\rafffr. 



fadbvckifcteccti t<uy<s 

-joc/ctstf* ctoMM, ts&o BetiiaA.; \3rq&rJtcL.Jix *>.Un. -rufte.; . 
tygy, re&ft t7ve AetiVens s-ottnct tfyf \ratc/icf& it a. ftiOy ctrcle : ' 

ft fy&erstactfe, andZrlec witzft. crceg cafajsi tv /&. JJc^psf: -, 

JLas'gjOfi/is' fas? tnrw *fiae &atGS.rusT-ou/id/ed.J>y raJ*itQ fires- 7 
TTvey &<?#n. &ut their <****. place &.Join. ttte. 'WafeJters af'tKe. ubv 
-<*$ *yas*v rrfasn and a. anSft oa2& Jurrjrer covered des* Jug '' 

pjh ^ f_ 11^ _i ir / L* + * _~**i -*-* ^_^_ *F* * ** - 




. 
his 

wetter. tntnutg t *+ 

iesaoertttiQri. almost* fore Ai& Afar in. 



.&am, 
Ore Jfan* A*Jy 



Jrarn. the 

' aJ!scU0u.yy t Ae 






c/a*>n. afascenctect, 
jtftaf S"etun 



/fc 



tans ,?/* the. 7* 

/ au tsc JfeavelV'jycty tsi .. 

&y/'* AeneatA, jBettJafi. , tAr vast 
J Astc*' 7to6 C/tat et *?&& 
tses tsr Ais snemoests 

ttsty of/ies* eartstly &usttj(y, ~ttr^ 



: U: u*ff& 
jf C*ou.r/t, is*. 

/T&I one s7cty*sf 

in. t/te 
on. 



"Jifittvmf cfesc&tt;- 
man casuiat: fotou/ M J 



ft 



t/z Erfen a, 



an. ta 
jfavcr*. 




lamented, . , 

______. ,- - .... oaf. of the Deep 

witfa jftarry Jatfinu** fifticsc <5b sntatstg kept by bLacJc slaves 

That wrA: all night ett CJte titarry Aarne&sf, ^itr>on& asut 

' -nxttZfyut Ort>:at: tfilsr, tisne cdi tXe J 

tfte. ltjfneJiftt*ojt, . and, JRroVuten 
T&iit vt%f>n"&te ct&tanx tf'dayjsourute&^Jtgr J*TOK .. 

cf. Hv4wi Hyz'** G&JX4 ful wisf stLeftt en. n(.aian: qc- cut refuscf -Co uunenci 
/&te &&/CSU& faring Lesft they -sTnoutcC omens' ntol&sftr . "" 
Sjeyeft- morjiisiffs? f^osf Aeizrd. t/tetn,. tis tJre por Atrd, y^itntst. tn& , 
its' isn&atM>nt: o<zren bireC: ante 2jukaryru>/t. ^ecera- J 
- net. ttr tste bue ^fttju^ajta SheM. inctosd, Aes 

t4& (Agy A&d i"- Wrath. <& Jury &Jlre 
intv &ie Litre:, for no*. tJter knew "600 tete. , _ . 
it KKLST J^JUcatL. tfie CMascener: tneystajcC not Siearct. pfte. Jjar'l. 

? 3-otig ca/M. /vitean, to fAe aff&npf; asr^t 2,02 Aearef these ltvnesi& 

fie. nearcL tAem catetst Grayer etll tfle JDututA 
^4nd. Af. be/telt t/t CtjudTaf Mat 



ut 



tAe 
~ 



,, 
tehetet tie CtoiuLtif MUtax. 

J3u tdt the Fanuty Divine collected, cus fcur ~ 
^ 

an 



ivbte . 




Di 

of 



tout-ruF close 
. et 

-to/no, src 



WartA. &, Sfoutstf 
etcAf ecLcn, otner 
in, GneS'ast' 



Gfotan.t aA-ti tsr On*.Jw<Mt.\vKo We/Hf everJUsr Gtytfasr, 



over Otoion- 



_^ 

Glofan. yucaf.. JLet efjf cterc&uZ cttsfo. arid, fat tty 

~ to cteouf/t, in, Ulro asnotig tftA 17*'attjf i giresf& , 

a. JPttnis'Aef'? O no / fajwis' Cntsf wottdsyu? t/us*g 

-^^x'^ tAeneactii . ems-fen* be/are; tsr^sr s'e/u&e &am. tAe iwu _ 

Qf Crfjzt Etenmty s ustsvcUurctt sv*fa / uaAnSwn by u& tiU. ste* 

usf &taer iscto them. 

'Zujer^ats^ 
in. 



- 
ath, 



tAe 



J3tsn*ly scud. *Six 



/tort you. /vta> fasf TAfaF&t. a/*<STarsvny, CLTU& J 

tfce ' "Wa^csi oycr tnar \\farfaf f astd *vit&j-~. ~, ^, 
' fa JSfvfnccJ Tii& .' JfofJTttsn. wit/LYcii. ft&vaty 
asi/iot f&te**/ Jtfc&ost. /< ffoeA' & trersKzt. Df.t 

tju* Flotntiy Divine or One jMan, even. J^esuS" 
One Iwtn. Otoloti &. the.<tppecLrct,nr.f_ of C-rie. Tnan 
ojofreartt camtng'ist. 



5 



t} 



V 



cfftven. 

Jet the JDt-vtfie T^JHXUI- 
Strut, OloLoft Lamented, 



"White 
.: to 



Acaret 



itc the 
Jar - ever, . 
*>tfn. <t great 

n, ar. what fc'/xe f Acusutf my 
enro' fe/'si{ty,ll,as c/esccnd&l tr 
6c/u/icjne jetted.: a, tffrtofa - - 

6acA : J tursifft round. t/j. t 
in. tActt J?*yc ftfarttstji* fire ; <fc he 
in. 



tna /srf*> stow to 
tx/vons /to w 




Aim. 
os AaaL 
tne wkate: 2 arose 




in. tn JStKrstaZ 6osam..*SL)c1Ih><fc { 

.' botii 'TZ/ne dfe, Efface, obey /ny I 

tyo asrtf ctbMtn-s&r stcf one Tfiaincnt 



caf a&. nor 

off. s*e/naust ,' ev&y -m-oftc 
/ftsr /KyyrKVts>?'; t&o' cm, i/t*. JZcveA. where 
<x'id wets' cut caff cut mi/t}& vcvtisA. &, aye sr 
Ytuti&A not jFoat. jne &, stunQ, we guard tfiem. 
attfirctJtiosis' ar^jnen. fun, cut. in. tne aae of 

&ierr ftesttnct. tuteatneifits />e/-atanont -fbr 
cu$ H/j wcict alon (o 



. 
t&srcantjesvt 

mosft 



fAls- A /{$ come behotd. it: 
ten, : ait}&t t&sxnat to W 

- _, _ , ^ mro 'Accu-'en, Sst. Cz*rsnant. 

a/f. f*t.c Z)te*&nfcr& of*JL*G& f>rojaActc wtu^^yet in deceit. 
l ^ e ^ V rt 6 , n c*^ft&gi<*f*- fi'om, new tjfafottjsy ear ^teatarm^^ . 
'Legion itf tne coutfe: tAere if no ~&u to d&iftrttcfiGn. 



nfth* Ginfes& e &'? db , 

'fi& War tyyan, the Z.t 

'.OMf& eryo^r 

55* ' ^.Sftry>y^7eru-S-a^at. a^ce. Jjfirtt't <5c. JutrjRuts- of Jteprobuts^; '^JL A 
[& raise cjjt> JM\-^fKry tAc. yZrfiin. Jfas~totJ?totAef' .a*. W<tr> ~*^~ ^. ^^v I 
^fUfYfaJt. me TZrettf, t/t& *fo&tnisvKtian, *r J^arocuftan. f . -^ 

Samson. jsAarn- by dte ' 
f> tro(cf "~" 




/net tt& a- itAe 6ftitK 
hrootfuig tn tA&r suindx tc/-rt6U 

fn&-ci/tt.f. Parent ? 
' tv 



en6or.fS3&-a 



as? a. 

Srctn. 
f Sb to 
t/ten. .1 r 



to renew tfa> ^j-o/an. foo 
zu> a/ Me S'tvtoucs 6ioot - 
raus-cf. up 



A 
a7z 
AL 
a^e. the, cries' ctfeAe dutrc/iejr 6ere tfa 



&t. GrOf. tfae 



cVci/ 1 

td&i under Ic 




22. 



U/fs ** 'note comfort tx) mare, ^,'corn. <&* i*y'tf' &~ 
tfioa, ^ecjucf oft tfiA Jner/c of Et&viity Stftion. 



73 ul- t/rsu. 
Os~c 



''V 



an. T/ir. ^LfjLcLfiac . 4*0 fiisr &uod, ancf. fr're 
t/tti j?oetstcs a/' War. cLsnfajuls/ivt evict 

the CbVervtft 'CXif.ru& advances? jS'atft. tAe 



.)} 



I4/ (?*!** >*Sitx-i we fcy deoa- est the Street, at the &&xt dy Lj 
^ faf/pr 6tiri&i&i ftt' 42bt'frtstj fjieruA &&e ourjSl/ncuuieiu>njf \ ... > 

f M **^ *?\. **A < * T". X ^^^ C-* - fm - f Cy - - f J . t -* . i M-V^ 



. , 

. oecamtsig one *>ift. 
Jiisn. 



. 

<Sc. brin, font 
O 

ij& f-VU. 
osr oifr beu>v 



Strong asu 




t/tro tfae c&rA tS^^ttricftCK 
fa f2fnn&a% vi&LGrtsr, A. the _^_ 

?ie ->v/>z. rolls' tsttv C!6ac& fc 2>i^ ^Ito^s' ts*&> t&e J)&*<wts'.- ,~- t 
t&en t&e JSfficrots' txufvme *uto6l*. aucuACe. c& l& 

iVcrinff t/ie. Ufifa crday. <t sv/JtsuJ down, upctt- tne 
'Lntrf ff>ti/id.. ^ufA. if a, ri&ior: ~' 

_ .. Jat&ntfhro/i Stake ; and. j$itf/i. 

o/>fara>, ftsf does Me Juat> at "efavcft,, M'I& coera. +/u 
' euiaf, loving tuo UL jffvwas ct terri6te 

cye/t <-isf t/re <. 
nsf, 6f 

. h/> Lfi 




of\7cJicvaA 
a. L,jttia 
1 " anx. wij.fi. snc- **v 



e/nAmae 

; isi JZdffi rcctititeel in- gofef.; 
/fnft. of'fAe tanvf. tif'^sit6eut. . 

uc ttsTend< TfO^^arci treat JT'c/pfivi'nxya.fe &* oreaJt. 
9tTjyj^ram aM itsrfccls,' oe p0j[jtcnf therefore O oiy 
+ J?'fsn<a&g form. <swect- nia/tt; ovict. .stltncz cunt 
to hicts. front. +Satatuf 

",, /<LS^ &ty vtrt^r. them. In. /teir &cefts A. i/*, C/tf _ . 
i, to conetetnn. f tfiz acf_ti&H'S_._: w/u> </ *Stuuns jOtr/ 



treetd. . 

wttft J/iout\ns$& afy'cy. and, tea** t/tf JSarfA, in. nr. 

- 



~^ 
{ 
' 



*^ 



away 



fiutct Vf&rsvy ast4 a& t/te -*r 
Jujzt. J^fesutss/tg/x. >eceuu>e ar^ 



/t/t^f. uTyou. aZro flee etf><ay asvjl. Leave row J^afAefaf Jficfa 
"rc/JnwtstJ* jy<OMi- tftto l/ara. cUtfro your- /TOW&- of jeffeaC 
TsGSZtAf Vbu. also sAa&L 6ec0rru> noVr aujtrtnive<e8i&.tM& 



jna4~tyfctorn& to s 



ay go oft, tU& cU Ctfc 
>b J^ AS' ^>c/ce . jf t ur**ru&, tkey dSesceitetccC rx> Sowtabsola, &, Qttajnajrutatl- 



, 

Of mtu>rtu. wm.: a/tet, -tf 




u 



eastward aTGolf( 



beJarr- tf 



csf. 



722Z *S**y rertvrr. or bury Siem. in. cooL i* rots, snaking 
"~ ' Wint: -press is ctt/ffi "V/ar> an Earth., if: iff tfe " 



A UfbtAsj 



Of* Los : a.n.al htrt Ae i-aY-St JttS Wortts: in. creter aAoi'e tit? 

cogs arc yfi/vru^ t/x t vi/ftee. to Cu/vr BUR cogsr or Ae adverse. 

&, v 10 tuts- s/jart- round, the. 'Wiiie.-pres's'es: die tittle Seed* i 
i/tf ft-o&f . t/if J&QjrtA,~wair'ftt*. tJtc fLoCtLJ&&&ti : t/u: ^LS'&f'itTiff^c 
'"<"/ fha ~}Afisi&-f>r4i3(f&st o^'JZei.i'CLfc; f/tc OsnfifCftA is* fst&fi&f 
^'/iLcfer wan. rnany eyes'.' the Male cLatfutd. in, velvet: 
uy rSptjzfs; ift stt&tttitfn, vjt&; t/ue LufJ^ goLeten. &p<nft* 



\*i^u: ^' (X**^--* *-^^*-*-#^4 ' rw 

'} \JH.c u/rttu?u-f ~SpuJJpr t 

\77tf Ear^usf ewnctt me. 



^*ot emhCetn. of 

iLUZ-' &ze. 'TapeytfSiFfn. ; ail- tft, Jlrfru.es . .* *^. 
to t/ue statfifUL \>egefuLnQ Mat < -^ 
pm* fSj-CLSj'Jiopper tna.t ~yt/t^.f &. tau-tghs 1 &. >' 
ir- **v,,~*:~~ Ac Joftisr fiLS dtAftjcter &ane&witfiou T7 jnvrn 
^u cl ^Scorptfut, ur tngre : n Gfipt ' ~Wa.?f>: JfortUt ft. the 



i} 



JO 



JJ 




\J7iR 



L 

on. confefttpt of 
> or outlet & 

d4. trttf 



jt&au-.f>4*-. 




. and 

t /n. . . 
.- t/eere. aJZ t/tf. ifiLt 

t/uus- frutouf I. 
the. Wine -/3rey<i'es . 

pef .ytrig Mt nor ctasice . 
.-ejt. fierce ttzmcsr cansunt-tJiif, 
-' 



of'tar/nent: 
A carets 



&-*reert af*&ie . 
to t/te. lureing 

the. 



; c tS 1 t&e, Sense of "Ta 
tfe Jf 



m.~r+juuu*i. . 

<Sc. eavenisf a? <* 



/if &. the cft-p 
<tL 



f-"cuj\.tu*& . J v iu^-t_c . 
tfvs FniZi* J^a r.cs of 




\ : !f r ~ oft ^5 

\QJF cnc ftutct^ f _ 

} QuC ^4llu.mAnc/fL ctt/M' On. Earth. Cbounvrce.. is th 
Jlj-vurtct the Cir of* <Sofg(*ftOo$a. est..t/i*> For*tSts> 
JMere_tftc o/.y tu **Q sf t**aouir f&atnsf DcctXA JE 

'y&ejR/S. 

1?i fun* gefj- rortn. esi 
Jjt, bCi.g/i.es' of the. easft, 

teens' Jv/rs Aere. taAaur 

J~iriGO0ryn4Xst oft. tnC' v^ 
3jr arc r//e ~?tjurrjf vc, 

"B areeste jrvzs- crva^cC __ 

But in, JZtwttity the, fear Arts?: Poetry. J-*ciLn.tit* 
^^tcf. ^3rcAu&sc&u" &A/f& ifJitot 
JYot? ^sra in. "3int# dk, S/jfioa Muere 

flff^imf apparent m. "jftsne. &. -Sffiiice. . en, 

- Jvtnn "wy 4% e ffigf 1 - JSart/r. (Z/{ t/te. atsne ofJuji 



etmast jutouas/tB ts<jTi 
, rtfxe Jttar &t fforvestfA, 



rounct the 
usf to tfu& JfeetVensr of to tftG JSar&ts . , 



fJSf tvntfef-r tr <? in&istxig*e 

Stood &, criaaL to tfte,,a&oure*sf afeAetinfnge tn. -voice 



^f&f.oKaan. to beVroyk tJt&-nr*xj3un&&xJlaJt*e& &,ZZ&3/L7; f 
^&2>u3x&*ae. <& ^aga^fG^tf^^aff^lvni^^r' vu&grJFleletS' I 
UMfCar/H'etKnae ta &et*fgt*3* f% 25e&: S'uAtZpei. <ZC_ /^ 
&f Xnf!tart0n. asreAa\^>ric..\X^ JZ&scf- tsr att* C&xsttt: y&u, ft 



<fe, CoaJZs a&swxaf, V 




are e/tj^vvy afL<&, dfc. tAxtet t/ue JLaAottrexx tzTtSt c M^tn n 
o&e#St tft*> gcr&x>uj' c^oKcd. Fht? fSt<rf ctasrfe &jport in jluMtfier 
fn jftt/i/tyerrco/af dk.jnatuibH'f.- every <"* tA* **JL***m -^ ^, 
IT ut. ity tsuriratR rn.x& aFcteStftff at-tAj. to 



&. 



cfctfT^-C. . 

~tc 



T' ' tAf ctarAsam, ^fky 
nn-tftg m,rrrucnv *vO/ts r to tfaf. ~ 
(tTJjOs.' These. ^heTVLsiions 
Ji&m. 



-A. cnc to gu>t 
toncA. fctfA 

'4> ftr _ 

e ***u >& Juta*9'. 

tyiMoat'cj 

ct*t> 



im>trtisn&ft& 
~&c&af! 
of- Las 



Gxetfotes* 4* 



ar/rt 

tt&an 

rtmttirr. ffteer fiftxsivti 
t&csn. 



fftcr&s etf>jrr&u 



r s a.&arelen, af~cz/*/*/i. 



Eternal DvatA, 




5feme tSfafty of' 
Creating Jdrtit 

%%mhzxi. 

Jta 



y ^fttrroujvdf. t/uc TStssions wt*A.parat<u2s &Ftroit 

3V7z/A' au'otfj^u, tfcjz ditirJc. r*esj*tojt3i of sorrow 

tteutrte fzauiC r- SwJZc&x.tt'Ott- 



^ tJL* S*tt (WJ ******* -l^^rrrm ^> f*-*^^C^-^i-*--- -- ^^ *- *^"i* 

5&cre ftxnnofs OK c/^e tftr&x/ioteL 




u&jyam. thett* JLocurt. dfe. 

. 13 , . 'Kr' etv <&>Kfattg >*itft,jroy <& rfeti^ 

J3tf "37tfrtr*rjnoft &.S0t&a~ ^anjt in. ^Ae Gate &PZ.u&atn. ctftxyet* ^ 
rttOK&er& are SKT&n mtlrtmt. &,~5&\>ejn tAtot-isfauiti *&. revest. /uf/t<h~ee 
aXxaf*.e *vt&. ffai \*feaJc jSfoeceres* &*& JttAricaXe, jtootftmjc* Jfarmsf 



VA* -- -^--- ,. 

C Cbcfc 



, . 

<&, e^r Aarvt, a, weepcnef ters-ar. 
sf to. cornfXx&gujncLCa 




. 

ragged covemJtfftet. tte tneszs. t& ajoesi 
.fug Jifzi!ov&t center Aolate tke Jue 

e. &x*jjez& i^eff^- tar rocks o-j$atn.yt tne j' 
crcunrt WtfJir trost. craOtftsf &<xr 
. tst. 



*^ +r- rt 



" tr**'.fA-^rt?/ - tx*JW JT}**-1 jr UZM-** 3r*-c*r*. JTl4,fr*. JU*r^j\y . ^^^^VVWUH 

<e csJWotttEcL ctexsp t^etA. JBrLcfgesr of silver A,^oUC^ 
tn^g^sr i& Jtwirctett. tfabft. etr7Fiamitigytr&. ~^t^_ ^ 
'&& e& asTvott*ttxstf* to Ziva ffur&Gtre.ct, T&ansr ?^ 

^^. t ^ A A.tf'jO . ^ _^ -.^y^ - -* * vr^^ -HJf *;t m ~KJ^ _ 




or Vt ^UJSf.fertoei the Partr MbrXr cr jyane.. 

of JlsTLts stxirt JarcA. <&. are conctevaf. tn. .* 
<* f^t&sctzcn. 

Auj/t: &y c/tA SQO& af'JC-.os 
, _ ztr, 

tst 

., _. -*oot "S 

onrixs vejr**c tfre. Sut^i'W&S A 
JSetn 

10 fJr* _*?i-m~r*v J*ftU?CftS fCCtC 
&. 

jnove /its' ft*eUju*-j3CacR. Acs' Aemrens atso stttve 



an. immortal. 
tnat: 



eyerr opaee Jtmau.ier, TJVOSI. a. t^/jjfyttle ot, SHasLf Oi0oa, VP*zi 
JSt&vttJii' of Mtec/t. t/tt& vege&UiZe Efrrt/t,, ty 6u re. A/tasta*: 
reccGGT&ei&i is" fAe. tsstsea.naeC StUJt. >y Z*as zreaxx . 



. 

to snar&tZ,J*tt!ft. . ftvffy 



. 
c cfe. Ore cst ttu: g/ytestttB. 

' 



lsur*> : Atzt t/r*. ZJifene 



Nerves' of r/ie2a#e*fee at* 
me f*faru)us ZfetK <sac/t 
creates 



ustweartecl. ui the 
'em. to (tcurfe.t*/tjO <* en. txirrorat: 




the JoufptMoxs of 

tottc/*. t&ein. not: Ae&re tftey Vef*e 

p/Kf/'/njOft. ctnct. AerJDt 
't^/n. Co fAaif ovt:* 



uteg/ttfrj; take, t/te >cusctn cAexref* . 
/tg&i'f'jtj CiZZ.tA& <^f&z./iatetiiesTt7L><*y^ 
.~Sf^C f Kf^a^ Af'Tir^aA. /M^rl>ert 't 



tf~Z)ejt&i- ujooft .^RnOsSAvti Jteryft/am. t~"Z~ 
vi>Aer-e 7iTo.i*e&. fersntsttftEJ? tn- J\tf/iUSfij/ 




Enct of tAe. 



is caJ/ccf. J&ittlaS* 
As cart. ca 
/t& Sonjs 



Beu/aAt* e 
"To ck* fnAa&tart$ 
JZu Jp&rtcJt to tff Sf 
Slff tfaz oe6>e3itrc&M:tfi,At mfftKeKe Aasaat. jvusu) 



. au-ousta. t&ertt- on. 



tAe. JStenrutA 



Wands of man to j**m 



Mfe jttay be siuaaen. cmtter 




Ax} WiMnett &.C/etc6~ea, wesm fzzAasn. 



jfratrt. At? jf^eat: revurtA 




n/05* /tervcC in t/te Swiff aTJSeuttJt. Jay 



*" i - 

iAvft 

_. fear of 

fU /L&J" JrtASO 

. 6c, f/i&t atone 
done ft feitZftA,dc 





J.a 



of He*tn*uty n. tCar 
jft:<*ri3e4it&k. a. snca/t 



.ir f 




Ctf2Mf ts* OtC 



_ tsr efnc<tjU/ut,;t: ejf Jtasn&cC. O**- - 

_ efijf. /Jt*&e* fAc St2.ftfi* f^ tn- tng. 

_ ut, Cfye. Z,otnsr AcSetnttal Vessels <*j 

t&e \-Sterrfi&cA.j&,Jjntftvte3f tKrriptie. 

CU* 

t t/io&e Gfatss vte& *&- t 



(Ac fforper.r 0FJBeua/t 
tstto tfU j' 



eve* 
, ^se 
Olotan, remcuncf. Aefar^ tbr Grater 




taar can- joatsy ccv*ttfafu& 



\C<t to J?& 

jre&ef. wax? often, to 
tstescsnt t&ro J3&ua& "to Tf^V? db 
fai Mtt&rliuLtef of QfobsuL. t 

i&.J ill tujtaa/^J%a^0u&ufe e-n try 
&r>rd^&^^te~Eon&*n^t&G C&axfc~eF~Cfc 

c.y a- *A4k/rte/r ut eacAJD&y t&at: JSfettzuj. cauttujt: /irtft, 

AuC-dte. 
t&autam 

'<&*& cV&vJWotn&tt tlFi&e.:pqyiffii 

JYlaJJt.Crtt 'tXjt&UX rA*f*Hf*/*rt. fn *0S <fL-c^irm*ii- r L , 

flttai 



. 

tiers' J^faatcae- " 



uti&tat' in- roc** 



cite <3T\*ua 




. 

; oL a tfa atoMtn at day s-Jt/td out? <xnt7tA*r J^<vA. 
ajvot&er fc*a.vfvt- to ceuy j*e**r upa/t At.r 
au- 



, 

C: a, Vir&tst a 



Cottage, jfood &r eie SnXxuuc 

otMe *n/t. ma AA took /*e <s* 

ton, tofts' Jutm^d, tfrcsrt. Lam&ecAsT ^faecfes 
i*te ctoWjt. est. tfejptutfns- VaXf. &Lj3i*tyt>as-< a. Aemtajfiut 
'e for me. tAa t/t tttrix?. rearj? J smgftt 

: tfa. 



in^Ln. fny Grtzaga. Gfarefcn*. xvuietert. 
4sut CsZotcte- *K at&freJsct. Aer tsf a 



&tst .af-ftrovitCcnce 





it 
fasfcta &e&fc^ 

twjaeusf t&a 




Strut, t/i&ste. t&ir]V(inte$ &, tkeirPtaoes within 



ujct &tR c 



tke Vtttvnst 



f*fcfc Wa** Woven. tti.LooJwy afJys*. Sc,Sufatt, r becutfytutsisftarv 
JnJPal&stcae X>txj*an..Ste(t ^M&n&t&r' tfar&fufixt oer t/u: jfea. , 
-/JtasTtfrtux, trt, LcZftftan. <Ses_Ktsz*martr trt, JJajttmsc&i-f &u**tzust, 




ky 



Secret IZs&txsrutfttzoJisr.suxt 

Oft. t&g^tybsr A^tfa pacfc CtirrtfL to t/tf 

-Sea r&mote 



.-&e*lcn IHfeavens A their C/utrchtt 




JScffcff^ 
i^3art^afCfreeztLa*t- 

Fbs* the C&aj&zc. Vtes> cuteute. aft&e. Sfru 




JfttJEemti&.ttalrway f ut' <x <le&c*>-stf to J^osr ~^*-*' 
^ZoJaow&zfuxita &c^3izunasua, & to s2ttdM&& J3ent/&<att. 

"2?ce.2/iX.v>cns <xre &ze Gfaru6: "* * * ~" " 



nd th&Forly^igntSliarryJlejf tofts' are 



frtCtLC,L<?.l'Ztl&S f 



GtTeat / Potypus f .J p ota*' 





And, Mf tease. cotfettLHg &/ A&r jKnaf into 
y efcertdeaC <io *"* a. Fa&tSzC \u0rsfc tsfttfa Axft&Sf aF/yreeur 
Out from, t&e 
Cutrdcn. t 






t*e>' its? rutfict. alace? & ce& 



. . 

ter Cttjpjftt& MO&* f:fe e j peu>ans'< IM. there fatmSE /* 
' 



ausrJTxttr t&eK. 



&?rtr&s& Qftjjttt&z. 



______ __ , 

i&Jtot of Goal, 




S5 



toT4crcf. o/ec t&o. 'DtMtje.JDc&cs'conJfiSiejr be Ma snare. \ 



e& Seven. JJeavens 
SfneZUufig* jrajn. Soutrt to aarm over tne. meuszttuns af^/t&u>tt- 

~0<, he ' 

eat tre 

aety Jtungjutg to 
t/t&Jttrut, far tfJce tOUcAfJf a, Vtjd. , *^- 



rotau*. 'JtLSf prey 

etpon. 

CZouct wuA Trutrtpetsr &. **tA. fi& 

~ 



Ay CfaeruAtm. jCurrausinLea.. ; 

art vt, Jus'jEcerMal.UetttA,] t& tsnvtoate 2&f 



&,&ef>apAt*rt. in, ever JtatftfryJsZerjntty 
CAaf: Jut. e*/t /US J'tftt AanaC X>eaKTcn, hisf 





s cttst, towartt <Teru3r<zemy 
. JZortefatt, 



: Jtisr eststep Jfym^tofatcfafor 



i' 



; tts- t&e 
eutS'afJus C 




Ola Ian. T^filc&rt stood. <e,j*erctevet the. Etjerjtai Form, 
_ ^JZsrtLicf. ]/irc0s*,: Hto/tefaeus Mere t&ftr acts' ' 
'.xcGptretnatJely.-atutjAeard. Oteta*. *tay to -W! 

j-/,y72C t&ae jrO-ive ttpon. e&&Lr0afa! t>f^r/tion..<Jir^. ttjdre.eLct 
s \^fuf._<i^K^Man.fJsee. oetTc0vej?dL,wij&i. eft 

"ity&PiikeaZstritfuif* ( 
*> fftf etVRffttes 1 _ ^-^-J- 





- 
City iSe-JSOJi&yJJesttrt: tntierfntsyCeeC AgyensC mortzzL Jfasn, 

n es ' 




csf J*Q ZfaffHrattast. 



creqggqto 

cast: aff't&fi u 



jsuteZes? ttvtt. catt& 



': &,no**SfuUL tJfcalw Butyte, 
eft. . ,_^ ra 

ife. ctottbsr aFetaa 

Female. \ 

_ Cfcfltf 

Power feut dustaun 



face euvsid<df, our terrors inEterni'& f 
t t*3ff<xr& v 
W, we. w 
buC Ote&ute 




4+ 





-from 



tn**-0 f?{S 
jf/ec 




^%e/e. (i3 Mioart)r*Af& Ofofaft. deJt'c&r^fecC to J*eAf>/ta 
Jitr cfottxlsf aflrZooaL. to. J-treasttf aft'ore. vSt&k. ctrccu/u 

- t6a j^-tccf est JZe&fLamsr ran 
.'i**At axe OffOfff. Mr StnrsyJEt&fft 

Ofofaft /otatecC a* a, Gasvrten cftfiftf'CLtn. 



Gcuun&tt cef 



<* t&at t 

r oufaftrctxJiaL report- tne />atft. 
vSoul, s'etunttxL tftto its jwiortat. sfrt&e 
in, 



Votufne terrtfrc 




. 
jtfe*. take 



tc 



at tke Milts &. iecute m* to >*y H/rath. 

^flw -^^ ^ ~~- -~- '-... ^^^rt?!^*^* *^** 

* ^^fi^^^^r ***^^TB^^m -^*^Bh * 



5oZ as* Jtt>cA*jSajea*. tretnktixg o6eyei \deebiHJraloxff tke *toy* 
Mark wait >& v^/'cfa, t^i>X rtx-f ofj/our eters&UjSctt.Scxfron. 

** "^^^"^^^CL -^^^^ *ai je^Jis^ 

Betvee*. Scurk.Mofan.tteet&LS'twtfor<PteLC4iG&ctrys&<>t 
fVAtfrv ftte Kc^yxjp ><?re pr+e&a.r(Ji$ forStLcrtfu&e. their OteruA it*. 
j/Zroutui tAetr toiris /youra. forth, iftetr ctworts &.tfteir 6o^cms Afam 
*^64 AU. colours of 'firecicus \sfones 1 , <_ ttetr otwort ficitcuies 
^j&Sou/ttffa(. M/tfA. /J/V/JGLrcLtton. a/*etnJ.rHcLlS tfiicL <&, viun& 
( }*ark M/&U. mj/ WQPtiLsS Capftoreajt J**r t t.eft& ^w^^ 

\Mo<&iH*Z)ictGjoUttattJLwaU<&f^^^ K ? " > T* 

\FropQrfLQncfJC.eK^JBre4tb H&h&t. '** c 
1 2)3pfayigStfxx*&J3eau&.' wttJrFtute. ^^ } , 

tf*rp&3r**4 m *-* > ~% ^_ ^^"> 

SX'-*^* 



trf^-V 



& 




iilltAty iecom* /info &, Itsetrscctnst 

/t trotted tn the bnmendb oftdeSpace ,' 

*.-/ ^ S _^ 7 f ^. ^ ^/ '!*./ *fS"J/ 




*W .ZJftwu 

t*egr7nt2. 
up tn *e Atf /vw 



tfa a wow at 
_^ a. 
&e SuH~i'ttto a. 



oe ' 



^: ^f 

s ^ kin 

5jStMV{ 
^\/i ' 

A/JfJ : 

ni 



/ : 



, _ ---^ 

, *s. *- 



u^ 

[s?^luv\* 

ijl?^ 1 

p ^rf 

^^\. ^+^*^ A 



a^Y2Gffl,.l.M 

v/fj /' ' 

y 



-.-^- 



I 



. - - 'V' , 

-r 

- ' 

.-_; 



e v\/0Veyr of.s'tgAf <SiAeart broke* 



' tne rocky 2slan of & tfaHce t/t/ 
fS/uiM6e tke-stekfatkeir &. fas 
r'ljs'onep */t rAtf 3t&neJ3wyeon, * 



er LH. r/i &zz>neJ-futei oe.Gie^ 
1/rt.tvigs? H/ritten aM oSer if m. 
'Jn&nfT/iat tsoo^n. ufioitne.Jk 




'wvm,^ *f.f,vr> n ,oe.c.<7V*<-ctfrf '- i^"*-* 

iMf. cfasp tt togetfi er> wth 6ucA faff &, &&$. *+& 
LenaejA.aU. 6/*tfs 'fringe &. t/te WAT UsgLrolUS*' 
7 HoJiab (S(S7ir*an, tfuttWifan may come to <* tent^ 



^te iefttfau. 
tna ake a fortn. 



r uon tkee ! .BeA 



tn my Cbnjfutttm<n.tton : 
. faeh. tfaUr cabinet cc 



o* the ffufxcuiFerm, m 



. 

. Hitt4Aou+tet*n tte Fema 
' 



s Jor the G/utdren 



Afis 'garments are 




fO 



'.*> 



'M. vutu>*. A. <&**m 4*ahXc H*6i tAr Jfet** Slkgel* oft** ^wgor^ 

j hut*. tOJHLgat trw hi-ckufo*. tfastJieafeif 4u*deeLon. cru.etty 
Sty -S/>fCfr* stilt ****.i4truii tjire tAan* Jolb*j- ny JEtmuuijto*. 

~fg AuSltS' -4tf* ^POtytttPtf n*0 *tm Vtti.^J A t4m \+JJ*flf JlnU ,& t***Jm 




A. dun \4Mft4rjr Aait & feu*. 



STtul jfoJH. lcu4gAter^>re>ceaats to mwder 4p cw&'-SaJu-^j calumny) 

Jg** 'fifal *&f is Luo&r ^^^^r^Couc^a^D^"\^^' , 
Sttvt-tfas tA& Se*/ttg*fa i*sfruet*t Atm. A. tfas rfy contw* X^" 



enters 

set Jesus 
tnaks AasCMtHH r tA**. &<**** 










./'. ./ 



b'taf 






<:*>* /J*/. tft'/.tn.'nfi t, 







^ "\ i^ ***!.' ft '>'<nt '* *,/. ...UM.;. *H**#*n*faii?fti, n * * -xy..- . . s< .> 
J [M ^^^^iatE^KU^^jL pHj* 

.S ^ ^ ' JJ**M, ^'^^^t^^^ ^ />!^r ' Nr! '';": '^' 



/ .-J / . -- -i ^* T.l ' 

C^utf^Ja^ .- .S&tf'*" *** '""*** "** 6ftmfK.f^ &*#' fy f . .1 s&nn+fi,} ^ t : 
/ \JfK- &** 6* f ' /> '. fy i *'*.**,' \. 'A. , f !T i/C.^/f 




\ ..-' f. :* , p'sfi 
" ' " ; "'^'''~' r "' 



It*'' 

N*x*- v .i>J "_ 

^.*'f ? % 



jfix^ V 1 *^>**i^tJfy*I?~. 4- 

tfij/i&t- <d-jdt &*$* ****''; -de-to^.L ifnStf ' 

. .&>.!. i-..>/^> a jsfa*nst'**;. t ' 

^,.^.-, - Vf - /- ' 

^'i v L 

v CV 








\> < 



V- 



^/ r 

^xir/^ *MM>A * 

f ' '/, jtr. 



Mt. tvintoX Xc2u/ C&i/cX 







\ V X J 

V V JgJ.^J&gyt, fL 

5i/ ~/, fe f *~*. a. db- .tft^ fat** 




,-, 

- 




j m ^ 






*M*^f* ^' r^^^SSTL 
/* * sr 7< * 7f >^r* - ^*- 

y/yiu+f*ftf*tt t A* jay v6u*tL ^^ A,,J. 



,'i'e ()>!*. *ci<~ Jvy ^t.tt.-uj,^^^ 
f * -..<;.,., ' -; , 
. ,-,f ftfJ^MUk f^af- ^ .*.**/ {t-.i^r- , 

& ^..,w,.-' ..,..< -;^, 





,v 



c'/,,. j-,/rf. tu ^ n^. fa^ ,., 



Jj J.' SJt ' f v ' 




!; : ~~ 




>/ ***.** 



y/^; _/fc**i % d~ S/'#uJf>y AM sAh #Lj&^~ 

tf ,'jj-'. I' ff .- /_-* > Xx ^ 




13 



..f.V~./"< ''~ > , . 

.4.* td* %- ^~*~ '+&* 1 **- * '- -^/t -^ *'.vu -^ ^6-Wt. 
frlh., x." *^-^*i, -^^^ .^*x -.-'...^ e.ZVM *. 
f^^*^/^** X* &&*+**? j*'*4n* ~f*~ , J^^ )+^ 
.+ ^~J+<-- 4>l-f ."'.*'**.-<(** "*?*+* ^_ 

-/\, *A* 7 .-VI*MIK. t'^i f-'*'~. J*~-*L*^^ . 

''*,- 
,i tZ ft*/** * 

tJ> *-"> -&-' 




**' *'*"'"> ~ 

^m-^ 

'^ I _ ---^^- 

^ v 








t/t, 



Jjt*, AMI *M*~J 



JL. j+*~ <v* &/*r ^rr^TT^ 
ZZr^jE ./~~4. ^J*-* **?/& 

T y ? /. f . - '. ^^ -^ - - -- 

v^. tj'jw*' *-:Vs**y u f*j- "* 

/iJZvi&y -'~ 4"*7/^v J / ' 4 -'- -/ 

WtfJtvt^rf't*^ <+,- KS*, . *.*. t 




fci..,l '<uyt*.*.*x> *?s~r 4 "Ji 

%Pf Ipr-iftt/a: ^*. / 

^y/^*^*'* 4 *^ ' 7 ^/ ~.r>* ^ '/ i*fm/ 09- j 

j*+^*5^ iJlA 

/' \v A y 
~**\. . 




t ,v* - " "' ' ' r~ ** '' '' tAt ' **'* '*.' ' 

t^n-f.-i*^- /~* r*v*. v .w<..w /.*^'O /\7- , -^ , x- 

A ' ';,,/, < 7>-*^***?i 

v , t . ^.,^-,. .,-..- ^^ft^ f&&i*lL f )tf&^ Sij^ 

Avr- -.-^'T^^-U ^^.'c^, ^^ 

..t I/!/***- .'-V/ *' -^, 1 />. <^ vUt,,'t/l:j^ ." 
f .fits..- ** -f'^it *t~~- "t-^Pt^'A. Z^JJ i''S' '' J 

^ f .,..,^^.^ j*v*r-* #^<&s%%>Z?:r 

.. .<( : .- .'^ '. / >.*./; ^' .',v^vx -v,.'I>,x~ ..4 I , / > 

".'" ,'*>V>-7 .^ ^".'J!.. ,- .^ /V-. ..,. _^- , 

' r '.- f , f ^' >k ' 

,t .'.. X'<- ^yr<-^ ..t-A^ -.*-^'*<l*!i-^ i ., ,.;! , y 









5 ' 3kv uC. . *-/ -*^ / - 5U/ y / /ivfef /*4L t>j*~ 

^rtW^-f <Ly<' .^V<fc. --'*V /<i fc*/^ //v"^*A^^ 

.ti~M( rL ^t*** J**fo*y *4) 6? *i*fi*j yu/i,/>85i 
& )l"i i' J*" |tMi>MlMk ^Ml w^y fftt^ trfims, la 3*uv 










\ 










>- ' " ' 

' _-.'' 



. 






,-4 
!=> 

o 

00 




THE SOUL EXPLORING THE RECESSES OF THE GRAVE. 




REUNION OF THE SOUL AND BODY. 




Q 



o 
s 
o 



H 
CO 



IX, 
O 




THE LAST JUDGMENT. 



VALA. 



VA LA 



Jfirsl 



The song of the aged mother which shook the heavens with wrath, 
Hearing the march of the long-resounding, long-heroic verse 
Marshalled in order for the day of Intellectual battle. 
The heavens quaked, the earth was moved and shuddered and the 

mountains 
With all their woods and streams and valleys wailed in dismal fear. 

Four Mighty Ones are in every Man. A perfect Unity 
Cannot exist but from the Universal brotherhood of Eden 
The Universal Man, to whom be glory, evermore ; Amen, 
Which on the nature of the Lamb's creation the Lamb's Father only, 
10 No Individual knoweth, nor can know in all Eternity. 

Los was the fourth immortal starry one, and in the Earth 
Of a bright Universe, Empery attended day and night, 
Days and nights of revolving joy, Urthona was his name. 

In Eden, in the Auricular Nerves of Human Life, 
Which is the Earth of Eden, he his emanations propagated 
Like sons and daughters. Daughters of Beulah, sing 
His fall into Division and his resurrection into Unity. 
His fall into the generation of decay and death and his 
Regeneration by resurrection from the dead. 
Begin with Tharmas, Parent power, darkening in the West. 

1 



2 NIGHT I. 

Lost, lost, lost are my Emanations ! Enion, Enion, 
We are become a victim to the living, wo hide in secret. 
I have hidden thee, Enion in a jealous despair, pity me, 
I will build thee a labyrinth where we may dwell for ever alone. 
25 Why wilt thou take Jerusalem from my inmost Tir(i)el ? 
Let her lay secret in the soft recesses of darkness and silence. 
It is not love I bear to Enitharmon, it is Pity ; 
She hath taken refuge in my bosom and I cannot cast her out. 

Enion said : Thy fears have made me tremble, thy terrors have 
surrounded me. 

80 All love is lost, Terror succeeds, and hatred instead of love, 
And stern demands of Right and Duty, instead of Liberty. 
Once thou wast to me the loveliest son of heaven, but now 
Why art thou terrible ? Yet I love thee in thy terror still. 
I am almost extinct, and soon shall be a shadow in Albion, 

35 Unless some way can be found that I can look upon thee and live. 
Hide me in some shadowy semblance, secret, whispering in my ear 
In secret of soft wings, in mazes of delusive beauty. 
I have looked into the secret soul of him I love, 
And in the dark recesses have found sin, and cannot return. 

40 Trembling and pale sat Tharmas, weeping into his cloud. 

Sometimes I think thou art a flower expanding, 
Sometimes I think thou art a fruit, breaking from its bud 
In dreadful dolour and pain ; and I am like an atom, 
A nothing, left in darkness ; yet I am an identity. 
45 I wish, and feel, and weep, and moan ! Ah, terrible ! terrible ! 
Why wilt thou examine every little fibre of my soul, 
Spreading them out before the sun like stalks of flax to dry ? 

The Infant Joy is beautiful, but his anatomy 
Horrible, ghast, and deadly. Nought shalt thou find in it 
60 But dark despair and ever-brooding melancholy. 
Thou wilt go mad with horror if thou examine thus 
Every moment of my secret hours. Yea, I know 



NIGHT I. 



80 



68 



That I have sinned, and that my emanations are become harlots. 
I am already distracted at their deeds, and if I look 
Upon them more, Despair will try self-murder on my soul. 
Enion, thou art thyself a lost power in hell, 
Though Heavenly beautiful to draw me to destruction. 

She drew the Spectre forth from Tharmas in her shining loom 
Of Vegetation, weeping in wayward infancy and sullen youth, 
Listening to her soft lamentations. Soon his tongue began 
To lisp out words, and soon in masculine strength augmenting he 
Beared up a form of gold and stood upon the glittering rock 
A shadowy human form winged, and in his depths 
The dazzling gems shone clear. Rapturous in fury, 
Grlorying in his own eyes, exalted in terrific pride, 
Searching for glory, wishing that the heavens had eyes to see, 
And wishing that the earth could ope her eyelids and behold 
Such wondrous beauty opening in the midst of all his glory, 
That might but Enion could be found to praise, admire, and love. 

Three days in self-admiring raptures on the rock he flamed, 
And three dark nights repined the solitude, but the third morn 
Astonished he found Enion hidden in the darksome cave. 

She spoke : What am I ? Wherefore was I put forth on these rocks, 
Among the clouds, to tremble in the wind, in solitude ? 
75 Where is the voice that lately woke the desert ? Where the face 
That wept among the clouds, and where the voice that shall reply ? 
No other living thing is here, the sea, the earth, the heaven, 
And Enion, desolate ? Where art tKou, Tharmas ? return. 

Three days she wailed, and three dark nights sitting among the rocks, 
80 While the bright spectre hid himself among the darkening clouds. 
Then sleep fell on her eyelids in a chasm of the valley. 
The seventh morn the spectre stood before her manifest. 

The spectre thus spoke : Who art thou, diminutive husk and shell 
Broke from my bonds ? I scorn thy prison, I scorn, yet I love. 

1* 



70 



4 NIOHT I. 

85 Art thou my slave ? and shalt thon dare 

To smite mo with my tongue ? Beware lest I sting also thee. 

If thou hast sinned and art polluted, know that I am pure 

And unpolluted, and will bring to rigid strict account 

All thy past deeds. Hear what I tell thee, mark it well, remember. 

90 This world is thine in which thou dwellest. That within thy soul, 
That dark and dismal infinite where thought rolls up and down, 
Is mine, and there thou goest when with one sting of my tongue 
Envenomed thou rollest inward to the place whence I emerged. 

She, trembling, answered : Wherefore was I born, and what am I ? 
98 A sorrow, a fear, a living torment, and a naked victim. 

I thought to weave a covering for my sins from wrath of Tharmas : 
Examining the sins of Tharmas, I soon found my own. 
O slay me not ! Thou art his wrath embodied with deceit. 

In Eden, females sleep the winter in soft silken veils 
100 Woven by their own hands to hide them in the darksome grave. 
But Males immortal live renewed by Female deaths. In soft 
Delight they die, and they revive in spring with music and songs. 
Enion said : Farewell, I die, I hide from thy searching eyes. 

So saying, from her bosom weaving soft in sinewy threads 

105 A tabernacle of delight she sat among the Bocks 

Singing her Lamentation. Tharmas groaned among his clouds, 
Weeping ; then, bending from his clouds he stooped his innocent head 
And stretching out his holy hand on the vast deep, sublime, 
Turned round the circle of Destiny with tears and bitter sighs 

110 And said : Return, O wanderer, when the day of clouds is o'er. 

So saying, he sunk down in the sea, a pale white corpse. 
In torment he sunk down and flow'd among her filmy woof, 
His spectre issuing from his feet in flames of fire, 
In gnawing pain drawn out by her fair fingers. Every nerve 
115 She counted, every vein and lacteal, threading them among 
Her woof of terror, terrified, and drinking tears of woe : 



NIGHT I. 5 

Shuddering she wove nine days and nights, sleepless ; her food was 

tears. 

But the tenth trembling morn, the circle of Destiny complete 
Rolled round the sea, englobing, in a mighty globe self-balanced. 
120 A frowning continent appeared, where Enion in the desert 
Terrified in her own creation, viewing her woven shadow, 
Sat in a dread intoxication of Repentance and contrition. 

What have I done, said Bnion, accursed wretch what deed ? 

Is this a deed of love ? I know what I have done, I know 
125 Too late now to repent. Love is changed to deadly hate, 

And life is blotted out, and I remain possessed with tears. 

I see the shadow of the deed within my soul wandering, 

In darkness and solitude, forming seas of doubt and rocks of repen- 
tance. 

Already are my eyes reverted. All that I behold 
130 Within my soul has lost its splendour, and a brooding fear 

Shadows me o'er and drives me outward to a world of woe. 

I thought Tharmas a sinner, I withstood his emanation, 

His secret loves and graces. Wretched me ! what have I done ? 

For now I find those emanations were my children's souls, 
135 And I have murdered them with cruelty above atonement. 

Those that remain have fled from my cruelty into the desert, 

And thou the delusive tempter to these deeds sitt'st before me. 

And art thou Tharmas ? All thy soft delusive beauty cannot 

Tempt me to murder my own soul. I wipe my tears and smile 
140 In this thy world, not mine : though dark I feel thy world within. 

The Spectre said : Thou sinful woman, was it thy desire 
That I should hide thee with my power and delight with beauty ? 
And now thou darkenest in my presence. Never from my sight 
Shalt thou depart to weep in secret. In my jealous wings 
145 i evermore hold thee when thou goest out or comest in, 

'Tis thou hast darkened all my world, oh woman, lovely bane. 

Thus they contended all the day among the caves of Tharmas, 



6 NIGHT I. 

Twisting in fearful forms and howling, howling harsh, and shrieking, 
Howling harsh, shrieking mingling their bodies join in burning 
anguish. 

1BO Mingling his brightness with her tender limbs, then high she soared, 
Half woman and half spectre. All his lovely changing colours mix 
With her fair crystal clearness. In her lips and cheeks his poisons rose 
In blushes like the morning, and his scaly armour softening, 
A monster lovely in the heavens or wandering in the earth, 

155 With spectre voice incessant wailing in incessant thirst, 
Beauty all blushing with desire, mocking her fell despair, 
Wandering desolate, a wonder abhorr'd by gods and men, 
Till, with fierce pain, she brought forth on the rocks her sorrow and 

woe; 
Behold two little infants wept upon the desolate wind. 

1W The first state weeping they began, and helpless as a wave 
Beaten along its sightless way, growing in its motion 
To its utmost goal, till strength from Enion like rich summer shining 
Raised the bright, fierce boy and girl with glories from their heads 

out-beaming, 
Drawing forth drooping mother's pity, drooping mother's sorrow. 

165 But those in great Eternity met in the council of God 
As one Man, hovering over Gilead and Hermon. 
He is the good Shepherd, He is the Lord and Master 
To create man morning by morning, to give gifts at noonday. 

Enion brooded over the rocks. The rough rocks groaning vegetate. 

170 Such sorrow was given to the solitary wanderer. 

The barked oak, the long-limned beech, the chestnut-tree, the pine, 
The pear-tree mild, the frowning walnut, the sharp crab, apple sweet, 
The rough bark opens, twittering peep forth little beaks and wings, 
The nightingale, the goldfinch, robin, lark, linnet and thrush. 

175 The goat leaped from the craggy cliff, the sheep awoke from the mould, 
Upon its green stalk rose the corn, waving innumerable, 
Infolding the bright infants from the desolating winds 



NIGHT I. 7 

They sulk upon her breast, her hair became like snow on mountains, 

Weaker and weaker, weeping, woefnl, wearier and wearier, 
180 Faded, and her bright eyes decay 'd with pity and love. 

And then they wandered far away, she sought for them in vain. 

In weeping blindness, stumbling, she followed them o'er rocks and 
mountains. 

Ingrate they wandered, scorning, drawing in her spectrous life, 

Repelling her away, away, by a dread repulsive power 
185 Into Non-Entity, revolving round in dark despair 

And drawing in her spectrous life in pride and haughty joy. 

Till Eno, a daughter of Beulah, took a moment of time 

And drew it out to seven thousand years with much care and affliction, 

And many tears, and in evening years made windows into Eden. 

180 She also took an atom of space, and opened its center out 
Into infinitude, and ornamented it with wondrous care. 
Astonished sat her sisters of Beulah to see her soft affection 
To Enion and her children, and they pondered these things wondering, 
And they alternate kept their watch over the youthful terrors. 

195 They saw not yet the Hand Divine, for it was not revealed, 
But they went on in silent hope and feminine repose. 

There is from Great Eternity a mild and pleasant rest 
Named Beulah, a soft moony universe, feminine, lovely, 
Pure, mild and gentle, given in Mercy to all those who sleep, 

800 Eternally created by the Lamb of God around 

On all sides, within and without the Universal Man. 

The Daughters of Beulah follow after sleepers in their dreams, 

Creating spaces, lest they fall into Eternal Death. 

The circle of Destiny complete, they gave to it a space, 

805 Named the space Ulro, brooded over it in care and love. 
They said : The Spectre is in every man insane, and most 
Deformed. Through the three Heavens descending in fury and fire 
We meet it with our songs and loving blandishments, and give 
To it a form of Vegetation. But this Spectre of Thannas 
w Is Eternal Death. What shall we do ? O God, pity and help ! 



8 NIGHT I. 

So spoko they, and closed the gate of the tongue in trembling fear. 

Bat Los and Enitharmon delighted in the moony spaces of Eno, 
Nine times they lived among the forests, feeding on sweet fruits, 
And nine bright spaces wandered, weaving mazes of delight, 
316 Snaring the wild goats for their milk. We eat the flesh of Lambs, 
A male and female, naked and ruddy as the pride of summer. 

Alternate love and hate his breast, hers scorn and jealousy, 
In embryon passions fill, they kissed not nor embraced for shame. 
He could control the times and seasons and the days and years. 
220 She could control the spaces, regions, desert, flood and forest, 
But had no power to weave the veil of covering for her sins. 
Females she drove away from Los, Los drove the males away. 
They wandered long, till they sat down upon the margined sea 

Conversing in the visions of Beulah in dark slumbrous bliss. 
225 But the two youthful wonders wandered in the world of Tharmas ; 

Thy name is Enitharmon, said the fierce prophetic boy. 

While thy mild voice fills all these caverns with sweet harmony, 

how our parents sit and mourn in their silent secret bowers ! 

But Enitharmon answered with a dropping tear and frowning 
230 Dark as a dewy morning when the crimson light appears, 

We hear the warlike clarions, we view the burning spears, 

Yet thou in indolence reposest, holding me in bonds. 

To make us happy let them weary their immortal powers, 

While we draw in their sweet delights, while we return them scorn 
236 On scorn to feed our discontent, for if we grateful prove 

They will withhold sweet love whose food is scorn and bitter roots. 

Hear, I will sing a song of death : it is a song of Vala : 

The Fallen Man takes his repose, Urizen slept in the porch, 
Luvah and Vala wake and fly up from the Human Heart 
240 Into the Brain. From thence upon the pillow Vala slumbered, 

And Luvah seized the Horses of Light and rose into the Chariot of Day 
Sweet laughter seized me in my sleep, silent and close I laughed, 



NIGHT I. 9 

For in the visions of Vala I walked with the Mighty Fallen One 
I heard his voice among the branches and among sweet flowers, 

245 Why is the light of Enitharmon darkened in the dewy morn ? 

Why is the silence of Enitharmon a cloud and her smile a whirlwind ? 
Uttering this darkness in my halls in the pillars of my Holy Ones, 
Why dost thou weep as Vala and wet thy veil with dewy tears 
In slumbers of my night repose infusing a false morning ? 

250 Dividing the female-emanations all away from Los, 

And wilt thou slay with death him who devotes himself to thee, 

For the sport and amusement of Man now born to drink up all his 

powers ? 

I heard the sounding sea, I heard the voice weaker and weaker, 
The voice came and went like a dream : I awoke in my sweet bliss. 

255 Then Los smote her upon the earth ; 'twas long ere she revived. 
He answered, darkening now with indignation hid in smiles : 

I die not, Enitharmon, though thou singest thy song of Death, 
Nor shalt thou me torment, for I behold the Fallen Man 
Seeking to comfort Vala : she will not be comforted. 

260 She rises from his throne and seeks the shadows of her garden 
Weeping for Luvah, lost in bloody beams of your false morning. 
Sickening lies the Fallen Man, his head sick, his heart faint, 
Refusing to behold the Divine Image which all behold 
And live thereby, he is sunk down into a deadly sleep. 

265 But we, immortal in our own strength, survive by stern debate 
Till we have drawn the Lamb of God into a mortal form. 
And that he must be born is certain, for One must be All, 
And comprehend within himself all things, both small and great. 
We therefore for whose sake all things aspire to be and live 

270 Will so receive the Divine Image that among the Reprobate 
He may be devoted to destruction from his mother's womb. 
Mighty achievement of your power ! Beware the punishment. 
I see the invisible knife descend into the gardens of Vala 
Luvah walking upon the winds ! I see the invisible knife. 

275 I see the showers of blood, I see the swords and spears of futurity. 



10 NIGHT I. 

Though in the Brain of Man wo live and in his circling Nerves 
Though this bright world of all our joy is in the Human Brain 
Where Urizen and all his hosts hang their immortal lamps, 
Thou never shalt leave this cold expanse where watery Tharmas mourns. 

280 So spoke Los. Scorn and indignation rose upon Enitharmon. 

Then Enitharmon reddening fierce stretched her immortal hands : 
Descend, Urizen, descend with horse and chariot, 
Threaten me not, Visionary, these the punishment, 
The Human Nature shall no more remain nor Human acts 
285 Form the rebellious spirits of Heaven, but war and princedom, victory 
and blood. 

Night darkened as she spoke, a shuddering ran from East to West. 
A groan was heard on high. The warlike clarion ceased, the spirits 
Of Luvah and Vala shuddered in their orb, an orb of blood. 
Eternity groaned and was troubled at the Image of Eternal Death. 

290 The Wandering Man bow'd his faint head and Urizen descended 
And the one must have murdered the Man if he had not descended. 
Indignant, muttering low thunders Urizen descended, 
Gloomy, sounding : Now I am God from Eternity to Eternity. 

Sullen sat Los plotting revenge. Silent he eyed the Prince 
296 Of Light. Silent the Prince of Light viewed Los. At length a smile 
Broke from Urizen, for Enitharmon brightened more. 
Sullen he lowered on Enitharmon, but he smiled on Los, 
Saying : Thou art the Lord of Luvah. Into thy hands I give 
The Prince of Love, the murderer ; his soul is in these hands. 
300 Pity not Vala, for she pitied not the Eternal Man, 

Nor pity thou the cries of Lnvah. Lo, these starry hosts, 
They are thy servants if thou wilt obey my awful law. 

So spoke the Prince of Light and sat beside the seat of Los. 
Upon the sandy shore rested his chariot of fire. 



NIGHT I. 11 

805 Los answered : Art thou one of those who when complaisant most 
Mean mischief most ? If you are such, lo ! I am also such. 
One must be Master. Try thy arts. I also will try mine, 
For I perceive thou hast abundance which I claim as mine. 
Urizen startled stood, but not long. Soon he cried : 

310 Obey my voice, young Demon ; I am God from Eternity to Eternity, 
Thus Urizen spoke collected in himself in awful pride, 
Lo I am God, the terrible Destroyer, and not the Saviour. 
Why should the Divine Vision control the sons of men 
To forbid each his free delight, to war against his spectre ? 

310 The Spectre is the Man. The rest is only delusion and fancy. 

Ten thousand thousand were his hosts of spirits on the wind, 
Ten thousand thousand glittering chariots shining in the sky. 
They pour upon the golden shore beside the silent ocean, 
Till Earth spread forth her table wide. The Night, a silver cup 
320 Filled with the wine of anguish, waited at the golden feast. 
But the bright sun was not as yet. He, filling all the expanse, 
Slept as a bird in the blue shell that soon shall burst away. 

Los saw the wound of his blow : he saw, he pitied, he wept. 
Los now repented that he had smitten Enitharmon. He felt love 
325 Arise in all his veins. He threw his arms around her loins 
To heal the wound of his smiting. 

They eat the fleshly bread, they drank the nervous wine ; 

They listened to the elemental harps and sphery song : 

They viewed the dancing hours quick sporting through the sky, 

830 With winged radiance scattering joy through the ever-changing light. 
But Luvah and Vala standing in the bloody sky 
On high remained alone, forsaken in fierce jealousy 
They stood above the heavens, forsaken, desolate, suspended in blood . 
Descend they could not, nor from one another avert their eyes. 

335 Eternity appeared above them as One Man infolded 
In Luvah's robes of blood, and having all his afflictions, 
As the sun shines down on the misty earth : such was the Vision. 



12 NIGHT I. 

But purple night, and crimson morning, and golden day descending 
Through the clear changing atmosphere displayed green fields among 
340 The varying clouds like paradises stretched in the expanse, 

With towns and villages and temples, tents, sheepfolds and pastures, 
Where dwell the children of the elemental worlds in harmony. 

Not long in harmony they dwell. Their life is drawn away 
And wintry woes succeed, successive driven into the Void 
345 Where Enion craves, successive driven into the golden feast. 

And Los and Enitharmon sat in discontent and scorn. 
The Nuptial song arose from all the thousand thousand spirits 
Over the joyful earth and sea and ascended into the heaven, 
For elemental gods their thunderous organs blew creating 

350 Delicious viands. Demons of waves their watery echoes woke. 
Bright souls of vegetative life budding and blossoming 
Stretch their immortal hands to smite the gold and silver strings, 
With doubling voices, and loud horns, wound round and round, re- 
sounding. 
Cavernous dwellers filled the enormous revelry, responsing, 

;J5S And spirits of flaming fire on high governed the mighty song. 

And this is the song sung at the feast of Los and Enitharmon. 

The Mountain called out to the Mountain, Awake, oh Brother Mountain. 

Let us refuse the Plough and Spade, the heavy Roller and 

Spiked Harrow. Burn these cornfields all, throw all these fences down. 

360 Fattened on blood and drunk with wine of life is better far 
Than all these labours of harvest and vintage. See the river 
Bed with the blood of Men swells lustful round my rocky knees, 
My clouds are not the clouds of verdant fields and groves of fruit, 
But Clouds of Human Souls : my nostrils drink the Lives of Men. 

385 The Villages lament, they faint, outstretched upon the plain. 

Wailing runs round the Valleys from the Mill and from the Barn. 
But most the polished Palaces, dark, silent, bow with dread, 
Hiding their books and pictures underneath the dens of Earth. 
The Cities send to one another saying : My sons are mad 



NIGHT I. 13 

370 "With wine of cruelty. Let us plat a scourge, on sister city. 

Children are nourished for the slaughter. Once the child was fed 
With milk, but wherefore now are children fed with wine and blood ? 

Enion, blind and age-bent, wept upon the desolate wind. 
Why does the Raven cry aloud and no eye pities her ? 

375 Why fall the Sparrow and the Robin in the foodless winter ? 
Faint, shivering, they sit on leafless bush or frozen stone 
Wearied with seeking food across the snowy waste, the little 
Heart cold, the little tongue consumed that once in thoughtless joy 
Gave songs of gratitude to waving cornfields round their nest. 

380 Why howl the lion and the wolf ? Why do they roam abroad ? 
Deluded by the summer's heat they sport in enormous love, 
And cast their young out to the hungry winds and desert sands. 
Why is the sheep given to the knife ? The lamb plays in the sun. 
He starts : he hears the foot of Man ! He says : Take thou my wool 

385 But spare my life : but he knows not that winter cometh fast. 
The spider sits in his laboured net, eager, watching for the fly. 
Presently comes a famished bird and takes away the spider. 
His web is left all desolate that his little anxious heart 
So careful wove and spread it out with sighs and weariness. 

390 This was the lamentation of Enion round the golden tent. 

Eternity groaned and was troubled at the image of Eternal Death, 
Without the body of Man, exuded from his sickening limbs. 

Now Man was come to the Palm Tree, and to the Oak of Weeping 
Which stand upon the edge of Beulah, and there he sank down 
395 From the supporting arms of the Eternal Saviour who disposed 
The pale limbs of his Eternal Individuality 
Upon the Rock of Ages, watching over him with love and care. 

Jerusalem, his Emanation is become a ruin, 
Her little ones are slain upon the top of every street, 
400 And she hei-self led captive and scattered into the indefinite. 
Gird on thy sword, thou most mighty in glory and majesty. 
Destroy these oppressors of Jerusalem and those that ruin Shiloh. 



14 NIGHT I. 

So spoke the Messengers of Beulah. Silently removing 

The Family Divine drew up the universal tent 
405 Above Mount Gilead and closed the messengers in clouds around 

Till the time of the End. Then they elected Seven, called the Seven 

Eyes of God, and the Seven Lamps of the Almighty. 

The seven are one within the other. The seventh is named Jesus, 

The Lamb of God blessed for ever. He followed the Man 
o Who wandered in Mount Ephraim seeking a Sepulchre, 

His inward eyes closing from the Divine Vision, and all 

His children wandering from his bosom outside fleeing away. 

The Daughters of Beulah beheld the Emanation ; they pitied, they 

wept. 

They wept before the inner gates of Enitharmon's bosom, 
415 And of her fine- wrought brain, and of her bowels within her loins. 
These gates within, glorious, bright, open into Beulah 
From Enitharmon's inward parts. But the bright female terror 
Refused to open the bright gates. She closed and barred them fast 
Lest Los should enter into Beulah through her beautiful gates. 

480 The Emanation stood before the gates of Enitharmon, 

Weeping. The Daughters of Beulah silent in the Porches 
Spread her a couch unknown to Enitharmon. Here reposed 
Jerusalem in slumbers soft, lull'd into silent rest. 

Terrific raged the Eternal wheels of Intellect, and raged 
425 The Living Creatures in the wheels, in the Wars of Eternal life. 
But perverse rolled the wheels of Urizen and Luvah, back revolved 
Downwards and outwards, consuming in the Wars of Eternal Death. 

Then those in Great Eternity met in the councils of God 
As One Man, for, contracting their exalted senses 
480 They behold Multitude, or expanding they behold as one, 
As One Man all the Universal Family, and that One Man 
They call Jesus the Christ, and they in him, and he in them, 
Live in perfect harmony, in Eden, the land of life, 



NIGHT I. 15 

Consulting as one Man above Mount Gilead sublime. 

435 For messengers from Beulah came in tears and darkening clouds 
Saying Shiloh is in ruins, our brother Albion is sick. He, 
He whom thou lovest is sick. He wanders from his house of Eternity. 
The Daughters of Beulah, terrified, have closed the gate of the tongue. 
Luvah and TJrizen contend in war around the holy tent. 

440 So spoke the Ambassadors from Beulah with solemn mourning sound ; 
They were introduced to the Divine Presence and they kneeled down 
In Beth Peor thus recounting the wars of Eternal Death : 

The Eternal Man wept in the holy tent. Oar Brother in Eternity, 
Even Albion whom thou lovest, wept in pain. His family 
445 Slept round on hills and valleys in the region of his love. 

But Urizen awoke, and Luvah awoke, and they conferred, thus. 

Thou Luvah, said the Prince of Light, behold our sons and daughters 
Repose on beds. Let them sleep on, do thou alone depart 
Into thy wished kingdom, where in Majesty and Power 

450 We may create a throne. Deep in the North I place my lot, 
Thou in the South. Listen attentive. In silence of this night 
I will infold the universal tent in clouds opaque, while thou 
Seizest the chariots of the morning. Go ; outfleeting ride 
Afar into the Zenith high, bending thy furious course 

455 Southward, with half the tents of men inclosed in clouds 
Of Tharmas and Urthona. I in porches of the brain 
Will lay my sceptre on Jerusalem, the Emanation, 
On all her sons, and on thy sons, Luvah, and on mine 
Till dawn was wont to wake them, then my trumpet sounding loud, 

460 Ravished away in night. My strong command shall be obeyed, 
For I have placed my sentinels in stations. Each tenth man 
Is bought and sold, and in dim night my word shall be their law. 

Luvah replied : Dictate thou to thy equals, am not I 

The Prince of all the hosts of men, nor equal know in Heaven ? 



16 NIGHT I. 

463 If I arise into the Zenith, leaving thee to watch 

The Emanation and her sons, the Satan and the Anak 

Sihon and Og, wilt thou not, rebel to my laws, remain 

In darkness, building thy strong throne, and in my ancient night 

Daring my power wilt arm my sons against me in the deep, 

470 jy deep, my night, which thou assuming hast assumed my crown. 
I will remain as well as thou, and here with hands of blood 
Smite this dark sleeper in his tent, then try my strength with thee. 

While thus he spoke his fury reddened o'er the holy tent. 
Urizen cast deep darkness round him, silent, brooding death, 
475 Eternal death to Lnvah. Raging, Luvah poured 

The lances of Urizen from chariots round the holy tent. 
Discord began and yells and cries shook the wide firmament. 

Beside his Anvil stood TJrthona dark, a mass of iron 
Glow'd furious on the anvil prepared for spades and coulters. 

480 His sons fled from his side to join the conflict. Pale he heard 

The Eternal voice. He stood. The sweat chilled on his mighty limbs. 

He dropped his hammer. Dividing from his aching bosom fled 

A portion of his life. Shrieking upon the wind she fled, 

And Tharmas took her in, pitying. Then Enion in jealous fear 

486 Murdered her, and hid her in her bosom, embalming her, for fear 
She should arise again to life. Embalmed in Enion's bosom 
Enitharmon remains. Such thing was never known before 
In Eden, that one died a death never to be revived. 

Urthona stood in terror, but not long. His spectre fled 
490 To Enion, and his body fell. Tharmas beheld him fall 
Endlong, a raging serpent, rolling round the holy tent. 
The sons of War astonished at the glittering monster drove 
Him far into the world of Tharmas, into a caverned rock. 

But Urizen with darkness overspreading all the armies 
496 Sent round his heralds secretly commanding to depart 

Into the North. Sudden with thunder's sound his multitudes 



NIGHT I. 17 

Retreat from the fierce fight, all sons of Urizen at once 
Mustering together in thick clouds, leaving the rage of Luvah 
To pour its fury on himself, and on the Eternal Man. 

500 Sudden, down fell they all together into an unknown space, 
Deep, horrible, without end, from Beulah separate, far beneath. 
The Man's exteriors are become indefinite, opened to pain, 

603 In a fierce hungry void, and none can visit his regions. 



END OP THE FIRST NIGHT. 



Swonb. 



Reclining upon his conch of death Albion beheld his sons. 
Turning his eyes outward to self, losing the Divine Vision, 
Albion called Urizen and said : Behold these sickening spheres, 
Whence is this voice of Enion that soundeth in my ears ? 
6 Take thou possession. Take this sceptre. Go forth in my might, 
For I am weary and must sleep in the dark sleep of death. 
Thy brother Luvah hath smitten me, but pity thou his youth, 
Though thou hast not pitied my age, oh Urizen, Prince of Light. 

Urizen rose from the bright feast like a star through the evening sky. 

10 Exulting at the voice that called him from the feast of envy 

First he beheld the body of Man, pale, cold. The horrors of death 
Beneath his feet shot through him as he stood in the human brain. 
No more exulting, for he saw Eternal Death beneath, 
Where Enion, blind and age-bent, wept in direful hunger craving, 

15 All ravening like the hungry worm and like the silent grave. 
Mighty was the draught of voidness to draw existence in. 

Terrific Urizen strode above in fear and pale dismay. 
He saw the indefinite space beneath and his soul shrunk with horror, 
His feet upon the verge of non-existence. His voice went forth, 
20 Luvah and Vala trembling and shrinking beheld the great Work 

Master 

And heard his word : Divide ye bands influence by influence. 
Build me a bower for Heavens, darting in the grizzly deep, 
Build me the Mundane Shell around the rock of Albion. 

The Bands of Heaven flew through the air singing and shouting to 
Urizen. 



NIGHT II. 19 

25 Some fixed the anvil, some the loom erected, some the plough 
And harrow formed and framed the harness of silver and ivory, 
The golden compasses, the quadrant, and the rule and balance. 
They erected the furnaces, they formed the anvils of gold in mills 
Where winter beats incessant, fixing them firm on their base, 

30 The bellows began to blow, and the lions of Urizen stood round the 

anvil, 

And the leopards covered with skins of beasts tended the roaring fires, 
Sublime, distinct in their lineaments of human beauty, stood, 
Petrifying all the Human Imagination into rock and sand. 
Groans ran along Tyburn's brook and along the river of Oxford 

33 Among the Druid Temples. Albion groaned on Tyburn's brook. 

Albion gave his loud death-groan. The Atlantic mountains trembled. 
Aloft the moon fled with a cry : the sun with streams of blood. 
From Albion's Loins fled all peoples, and nations of the Earth 
Fled, with the noise of slaughter, and the stars of Heaven fled. 

40 Jerusalem came down in a dire ruin over all the Earth, 

She fell cold from Lambeth's vale in groans and dewy death, 
The dew of anxious souls, the death sweat of the dying, 
In every pillared hall and arched roof of Albion's skies. 

The brother and the brother bathe in blood upon the Severn, 
45 The maiden weeping by, the father and mother with 

The maiden's father and her mother fainting over the body, 
And the young man the murderer fleeing over the mountains. 

Reuben slept on Penmaenmawr, and Levi slept on Snowdon, 

Their eyes, their ears, their nostrils and tongues roll outward, they 

behold 

50 What is within now seen without ; they rave to the hungry wind. 
They become Natures far remote in a little dark land. 

The daughters of Albion girded around their garments of needlework 
Stripping Jerusalem's curtains from mild demons of the hills 
Across Europe and Asia to China and Japan like lightnings 
55 They go forth and return to Albion on his rocky couch. 

2 * 



20 NIGHT II. 

Guendolen, Ragan, Sabrina, Gonoril, Mehetabel, Cordelia, 
Boadicea, Conwenna, Estrild, Guinifred, Ignoze, Cambel, 
Binding Jerusalem's children in the dungeons of Babylon. 
They play before the Armies, before the hounds of Nimrod, 
60 While the Prince of Light on Salisbury Plain covers the Druid 
Thrones. 

The Tigers of wrath called the horses of instruction from their mangers, 
They unloosed them and put on the harness of gold, silver and ivory, 
In human forms distinct they stood round Urizen, Prince of Light. 
Rattling, the adamantine chains heave up the ore 
65 In mountainous masses plunged in furnaces they shut and sealed 
The furnaces a time and times. All the while blew the North 
His cloudy bellows, and the South and East and dismal West, 
And all the while the plough of iron cut the dreadful furrows 
In Ulro, beneath Beulah, where the dead wail night and day. 

70 Luvah was cast into the furnaces of affliction and sealed, 
And Vala fed in cruel delight the furnaces with fire. 
Stern Urizen beheld, urged by necessity to keep 
The evil day afar, and if perchance with iron power 
He might avert his own despair. In woe and fear he saw 

76 Vala incircle round the furnace, where Luvah was closed. 
In joy she heard his howlings and forgot he was her Luvah 
With whom she walked in bliss in times of innocence and youth. 

Hear ye the voice of Luvah from the furnaces of Urizen : 
If I indeed am Vala's King, and ye, oh Sons of Men, 

80 The workmanship of Luvah's hands in times of everlasting. 

When I called forth the earthworm from the cold and dark obscure 
And nurtured her, I fed her with my rains and dews, she grew 
A scaled serpent, yet I fed her though she hated me, 
Day after day she fed upon the mountains in Luvah's sight, 

85 I brought her through the wilderness, a dry and thirsty land, 
And I commanded springs to rise for her in the dark desert, 



KlGflT It. 21 

Till she became a dragon, winged, bright, and poisonous. 

I opened all the floodgates of the heavens to quench her thirst 

Till she became a little weeping infant a span long. 

90 I carried her in my bosom as a man carries a lamb, 
I loved her, I gave her all my soul and my delight, 
I hid her in soft gardens and in secret bowers of summer 
Inextricable labyrinths. She bore me sons and daughters 
And they have taken her away and hid her from my sight. 
95 They have surrounded me with walls of iron and brass. Oh Lamb 
Of God clothed in Luvah's garments ! little knowest thou 
Of Death Eternal, that we all go to Eternal Death 
To our primaeval chaos in fortuitous concourse of incoherent 
Discordant principles of Love and Hate. I suffer affliction 

100 Because I love, for I was Love, but hatred awakes in me, 

And Urizen who was Faith and certainty is changed to Doubt, 

The Hand of Urizen is upon me because I blotted out 

That Human Delusion to deliver all the Sons of God 

From bondage of the Human Form. Oh first-born Son of Light, 

105 Oh Urizen, my enemy, I weep for thy stern ambition, 

But weep in vain. Oh, when will you return, Vala the Wanderer ? 
These were the words of Luvah, patient in afflictions, 
Reasoning from the Loins in the unreal forms of Ulro's night. 
And when Luvah, age after age, was quite melted with woe, 
110 The fires of Vala faded like a shadow cold and pale, 
An evanescent shadow. Last she fell, a heap of ashes 
Beneath the furnaces, a woeful heap in living death. 

Then were the furnaces unsealed with spades and pickaxes, 
Roaring let out the fluid. The molten metal ran in channels 
116 Cut by the plough of ages, held in Urizen's strong hand 

In many a valley. For the bulls of Luvah dragged the plough. 
With trembling horror, pale, aghast, the children of Man 
Stood on the infinite earth and saw these visions in the air, 
In waters, and in earth beneath. They cried to one another 



22 NIGHT It. 

120 What, arc we terrors to one another ? Come, oh brethren, wherefore 
Was this wide earth spread all abroad ? Not for wild beasts to roam. 
But many stood silent, and busied in their families. 
And many said, We see no visions in the darkened air, 
Measure the course of that sulphur orb that lights the darksome day. 

123 Set stations on the breeding earth and let us buy and sell. 
Others arose, and schools erected forming instruments 
To measure out the course of heaven. Stern Urizen beheld 
In woe his brethren and his sons in darkening woe lamenting 
Upon the winds in clouds involved. Uttering his voice in thunder 

130 Commanding all the work with care and power and severity. 

Then seized the lions of Urizen their work and heated in the forge, 
Roar the bright masses. Thundering beat the hammers. Many a 

pyramid 

Is formed and thrown down thundering into the deeps of nonentity, 
Heated red-hot they, hissing, rend their way down many a league 

135 Till resting each his centre finds. Suspended there they stand 
Casting their sparkles dire abroad into the dismal deep. 
For, measured out in ordered spaces, the sons of Urizen 
With compasses divide the deep. They the strong scales erect 
That Luvah rent from the faint heart of the Fallen Man, 

140 And weigh the massy cubes, then fix them in their awful stations. 

And all the time in caverns shut the golden looms erected, 
First span, then wove the atmospheres. Then the spider and worm 
Plied the winged shuttle, piping shrill through all the listening threads, 
Beneath the caverns roll the weights of lead and spindles of iron, 
145 The enormous warp and woof rage direful on the affrighted deep. 

While far into the vast unknown the strong- winged eagles bend 
Their venturous flight in human forms distinct through darkness deep. 
Their bear the woven draperies. On golden hooks they hang abroad 
The universal curtains, and spread out from sun to sun 
150 The vehicles of light. They separate the furious particles 
Into mild currents as the water mingles with the wine. 



NIGHT II. 23 

While thus the spirits of strongest wing enlighten the dark deep 
The threads are spun and the cords twisted and drawn out. Then 

the weak 
Begin their work and many a net is netted, many a net 

155 Spread, and many a spirit caught : innumerable the nets, 
Innumerable the gins and traps, and many a soothing flute 
Is formed, and many a corded lyre outspread over the immense. 
In cruel delight they trap the listeners, and in cruel delight 
Bind them, condensing the strong energies into little compass. 

160 Some became seed of every plant that shall be planted. Some 
The bulbous roots thrown up together into barns and garners. 

Then rose the builders. First the Architect divine his plan 
Unfolds, and the wondrous scaffold reared all round the infinite 
Quadrangular the building rose, the heavens squared by a line, 
165 Trigons and cubes divide the elements in finite bonds. 

Multitudes without number work incessant, the hewn stone 
Is placed in beds of mortar mingled with the ashes of Vala. 
Severe the labour. Female slaves the mortar trod oppressed. 

Twelve halls after the names of his twelve sons composed 
170 The wondrous building, and three central domes after the names 

Of his three daughters were encompassed by the twelve bright halls. 
Every hall surrounded by a bright paradise of delight, 
In which were towns and cities, nations, seas, mountains and rivers. 
Each dome opened towards four halls, and the three domes encompassed 
175 The Golden Hall of Urizen, whose western side glow'd bright 
With ever streaming fires beaming from his awful limbs. 
His Shadowy Feminine Semblance here reposed on a white couch, 
Or hovered over his starry head, and when he smiled she brightened 
Like a bright cloud in harvest ; but when Urizen frowned she wept 
180 In mists over his carved throne. And when he turned his back 
Upon his golden hall and sought the labyrinthine porches 
Of his wide heaven. Trembling, cold, in palsy fears she sat 
A shadow of despair. Therefore toward the west Urizen formed 



24 .M..TTT ti. 

A recess in the wall for fires to glow upon the pale 
185 Females, lonely in his absence, and her daughters oft upon 
A golden altar burned perfumes with art celestial formed 
Foursquare, sculptured and sweetly engraved to please their shadowy 

mother. 

Ascending into her misty garments the blue smoke rolled to revive 
Her cold limbs in the absence of her lord. Also her sons 
190 With lives of victims sacrificed upon an altar of brass, 

On the East side revived her soul with lives of beasts and birds 
Slain on the altar, up ascending into her cloudy bosom : 
Of terrible workmanship the altar, labour of ten thousand slaves, 
One thousand men of wondrous power spent their lives in its formation. 
198 It stood on twelve steps named after her twelve sons, 
And was erected at the chief entrance of Urizen's hall. 

When Urizen returned from his immense labours and travels, 

Descending she reposed beside him, folding him around 

In her bright skirts. Astonished and confounded he beheld 

200 Her shadowy form now separate. He shuddered and was silent. 
Till her caresses and her tears revived him to life and joy. 
Two wills they had, two intellects, and not as in time of old, 
This Urizen perceived, and silent brooded in darkening clouds, 
To him his labour was but sorrow and his kingdom was repentance, 

to* He drove the male spirits all away from Ahania, 
And she drove all the females from him away. 

Los joyed, and Enitharmon laughed, saying, Let us go down 
And see their labour and sorrow. They went down to see the woes 
Of Vala, and the woes of Luvah, to draw in their delights, 
Sio And Vala like a shadow oft appeared to Urizen. 

The King of Night beheld her moving among the brick-kilns compelled 
To labour night and day among the fires, her lamenting voice 
Is heard when silent night returns and labourers take their rest. 

Lord, wilt thou not look upon our sore afilictions 



NIGHT II. 25 

215 Among these flames incessant labouring ? Our hard masters laugh 
At all our sorrow. We are made to turn the wheel for water, 
To carry the heavy basket on our scorched shoulders, to sift 
The sand and ashes, to mix the clay with tears and repentance. 
The times are now returned upon us. We have given ourselves 

220 To scorn, and now are scorned by the slaves of our enemies. 
Our beauty is covered over with clay and ashes, and our backs 
Furrow'd with whips, and our flesh bruised with the heavy basket. 
Forgive us, Oh, thou piteous one whom we have offended ! Forgive 
The weak remaining shadow of Vala that returns in sorrow to thee. 

225 I cannot see Luvah as of old, I only see his feet 

Like pillars of fire travelling through darkness and nonentity, 
Thus she lamented day and night compelled to labour and sorrow. 
Luvah in vain her lamentations heard : in vain his love 
Brought him in various forms before her, still she knew him not, 

230 Still she despised him, calling on his name and knowing him not, 
Still hating, still professing love, still labouring in the smoke. 

But infinitely beautiful the wondrous work arose 
In sorrow and care, a golden world whose porches round the heaven, 
And pillar'd halls and rooms received the eternal wandering stars. 
235 A wondrous golden building, many a window, many a door, 
And many a division let in and out the vast unknown. 
Circled in infinite wall immovable, within its walls and recesses 
The heavens were closed, and spirits mourned their bondage night 

and day, 
And the Divine Vision appeared in Luvah's robes of blood. 

240 There was the Mundane shell builded by Urizen's strong power. 
Sorrowing went the planters forth to plant, the sower to sow, 
They dry the channels for the rivers, they poured abroad the seas, 
The seas and lakes. They reared the mountains and the rocks and hills 
In beauteous order. Thence arose soft clouds and exhalations 

246 Wandering even to the sunny orbs of light and heat, 
For many a window ornamented with sweet ornaments 



26 NIGHT II. 

Looked out into the world of Tharmas, where in ceaseless torrents 
His billows roll where monsters wander in the foamy paths. 

On clouds the sons of Urizen beheld heaven walled round 
280 They weighed and ordered all, and Urizen comforted saw 

The wondrous work flow forth like visible out of the invisible, 
For the Divine Lamb, even Jesus who is the Divine Vision, 
Permitted all lest Man should fall into Eternal Death, 
For when Luvah sunk down himself put on the robes of blood 
255 Lest the state called Luvah should cease, and the Divine Vision 
Walked in robes of blood till he who slept should awake. 

Thus were the stars of heaven created like a golden chain 

To bind the Body of Man to heaven from falling into the abyss. 

Each took his station and his course began with sorrow and care. 

260 In sevens and tens and fifties, hundreds, thousands, numbered all 
According to their various powers subordinate to Urizen. 
And to his sons in their degrees, and to his beauteous daughters 
Travelling in silent majesty along their ordered ways 
In right lined paths outmeasured by proportion, number, weight, 

265 And measure, mathematic motion wondrous along the deep 
In fiery pyramid or cube, or on ornamented pillars square 
Of fire, far shining, travelling along even to its destined end, 
Then falling down a terrible space, recovering in winter dire 
Its wasted strength it back returns upon a nether course, 

270 Tin fi re d with ardour, fresh recruited in its humble spring 
It rises up on high all summer, till its wearied course 
Turns into autumn. Such the periods of many worlds. 
Others triangular, right-angled course maintain. Others obtuse, 
Acute, travel in simple paths. But others move 

275 In intricate ways, biquadrate, trapeziums, rhombs, rhomboids, 
Parallelograms triple and quadruple, polygons 
In their amazing hard subdued course in the dark deep. 

And Los and Enitharmon were driven down by cheir desires, 
Descending sweet upon the wind among soft harps and voices 



NIGHT It. 27 

280 To plant divisions in the soul of Urizen and Ahania, 

To conduct the voice of Enion to Ahania's midnight pillow. 

Urizen saw and envied, and his imagination was filled ; 
Repining he contemplated the past in his bright sphere, 
Terrified with his heart and spirit at the visions of futurity 
285 That his dread fancy formed before him in the unformed void. 

For Los and Enitharmon walked forth on the dewy earth, 
Contracting or expanding all their flexible senses 
At will to murmur in the flowers small as the honey-bee, 
At will to stretch across the heavens and step from star to star, 
290 Or standing on the earth erect, or on the stormy seas, 

Driving the storms before them or delighting in sunny beams, 
While round their heads the elemental gods kept harmony. 

And Los said : Lo, the lily pale and the rose reddening fierce 
Reproach thee, and the beamy garden sickens at thy beauty, 
295 I grasp thy vest in my strong hands in vain. Like water springs 
In the bright sands of Los evading my embrace. Thus I alone 
Wander among the virgins of the summer. Look, they cry, 
The poor forsaken Los mocked by the worm, the shelly snail, 
The emmet and the beetle, hark ! they laugh and mock at Los. 

300 Secure now from the smitings of thy power, Demon of Fury, 
Enitharmon answered. If the god enraptured me infold 
In clouds of sweet obscurity my beauteous form dissolving, 
Howl thou over the body of death. 'Tis thine. But if among the visions 
Of summer I have seen thee sleep and turn thy cheek delighted 

305 Upon the rose or lily pale, or on a bank where sleep 

The beamy daughters of the light, starting, they rise, they flee 
From thy fierce love, for though I am dissolved in the bright god 
My spirit still pursues thy false love over rocks and valleys. 

Los answered : Therefore fade I thus dissolved in raptured trance, 
3 10 Thou canst repose on clouds of secrecy, while o'er my limbs 



28 NIGHT II. 

Cold dews and hoary frost creep, though I lie on banks of summer 
Among the branches of the world. Cold and repining Los 
Still dies for Enithannon, nor a spirit springs from my dead corse, 
Then I am dead till thou revivest me with thy sweet song. 
315 Now taking on Ahania's form and now the form of Enion 
I know thee not as once I knew thee in those blessed fields 
Where Memory wishes to repose among the flocks of Tharmas. 

Enitharmon answered, Wherefore dost thou throw thine arms around 
Ahania's image ? I deceived thee and will still deceive. 
320 Urizen saw thy sin and hid his beams in darkening clouds. 

I still keep watch although I tremble and wither across the heavens 
In strong vibrations of fierce jealousy, for thou art mine, 
Created for my will, my slave, though strong, though I am weak. 
Farewell, the God calls me away, I depart in my sweet bliss. 

325 She fled, vanishing upon the wind and left a dead cold corse 
In Los's arms. Howlings began over the body of death. 

Los spoke. Thy God in vain shall call thee if by my strong power 
I can infuse my dear revenge into his glowing breast. 
There jealousy shall shadow all his mountains and Ahania 
330 Curse thee, thou plague of woeful Los, and seek revenge on thee. 

So saying in deep sobs he languished till dead ; he also fell. 
Night passed, and Enitharmon ere the dawn returned in bliss. 
She sang over Los reviving him to life : his groans were terrible, 
And thus she sang, 

I seize the sphery harp, awake the strings ! 

At the first sound the golden Sun arises from the deep 
And shakes his awful hair, 

The echo wakes the moon again to unbind her silver locks, 
The golden Sun bears on my song, 
340 And nine bright spheres of harmony rise round the fiery king. 



NIGHT IT. 29 

The joy of woman is the death even of her most beloved, 
Who dies for love of her 

In torments of fierce jealousy and pangs of adoration. 
The lovers' night bears on my song 
345 Arid the nine spheres rejoice beneath my powerful control. 

They sing unwearied to the notes of my immortal hand. 
The solemn silent moon 

Reverberates the long harmony sounding upon my limbs, 
The birds and beasts rejoice and play, 
350 And every one seeks for his mate to prove his inmost joy. 

Furious and terrible they sport and rend the nether deep, 
The deep lifts up his rugged head 

And lost in infinite hovering wings vanishes with a cry. 
The fading cry is ever dying, 
355 The living voice is ever living in its inmost joy. 

Arise, you little glancing wings and sing your infant joy, 
Arise and drink your bliss, 

For everything that lives is holy, for the source of life 
Descends to be a weeping babe ; 
360 For the earthworm renews the moisture of the sandy plain. 

Now my left hand I stretch abroad, even to Earth beneath, 
And strike the terrible string. 

I wake sweet joy in dews of sorrow and I plant a smile 
In forests of affliction, 
365 And wake the bubbling springs of life in regions of dark death. 

0, I am weary. Lay thy hand upon me or I faint, 
I faint beneath these beams of thine, 

For thou hast touched my fine senses and they answered thee. 
Now I am nothing, and I sink 
370 And fall on the bed of solemn sleep till thou awakenest me. 



30 



MGHT II. 



Thus sang the lonely one in rapturous delusive trance. 
Los heard, reviving. He seized her in his arms, delusive hope 
Kindling she led him into shadows, and thence fled outstretched 
Upon the immense like a bright rainbow, weeping, smiling, fading. 



375 



Thus lived Los, driving Enion far into the deathful infinite, 
That he may also draw Ahania's spirit into her vortex. 
Ah, happy blindness which sees not the terrors of the uncertain ! 
And thus she wails on the dark deep ; the golden heavens tremble. 



I am made to sow the thistle for wheat, the nettle for a nourishing 

dainty. 

380 I have planted a false oath on the earth. It has brought forth a 
poison tree. 

I have chosen the serpent for a councillor, and the dog 

For a schoolmaster to my children. 

I have blotted out from light and living the dove and the nightingale. 

I have caused the earthworm to beg from door to door. 
388 I have taught the thief a secret path into the house of the just. 

I have taught pale artifice to spread his nets upon the morning. 

My heavens are brass, my earth is iron, my moon a clod of clay, 

My sun a pestilence burning at noon, a vapour of death in the night. 

What is the price of experience ? Do men buy it for a song ? 
390 Or wisdom for a dance in the street ? No, it is bought with the price 

Of all that a man hath, his wife, his house, his children. 

Wisdom is sold in the desolate market where none come to buy, 

And in the withered fields where the farmer ploughs for bread in vain. 

It is an easy thing to triumph in the summer's sun, 
895 And in the harvest to sing on the waggon loaded with corn. 

It is an easy thing to talk of patience to the afflicted, 

To speak the laws of prudence to the houseless wanderer, 

To listen to the hungry raven's cry in the winter season, 

When the red blood is filled with wine and with the marrow of lambs. 
40 It is an easy thing to laugh at wrathful elements, 



NIGHT II. 31 

To hear the dog howl at the wintry door, the ox in the slaughter-house 

moan; 

To see a god on every wind and a blessing on every blast ; 
To hear sounds of love in the thunderstorm that destroys our enemy's 

house ; 
To rejoice in the blight that covers his field, in the sickness that cuts 

off his children. 
4 5 While our olive and wine sing and laugh round our door, and our 

children bring fruits and flowers, 
Then the groan and the dolor are quite forgotten, and the slave 

grinding at the mill, 
And the captive in chains, and the poor in the prison, and the soldier 

in the fields 
When the shattered bone hath laid him groaning among the happier 

dead. 

It is an easy thing to rejoice in the tents of prosperity ; 
410 Thus could I sing and thus rejoice : but it is not so with me. 

Ahania heard the lamentation, and a swift vibration 
Spread through her golden frame. She rose up e'er the dawn of day 
When Urizen slept on his couch. Drawn through unbounded space 
On to the margin of Non-Entity the bright female came. 
415 There she beheld the terrible form of Enion in the void, 

And never from that moment could she rest upon her pillow. 



ENP OP THE SECOND NIGHT. 



% 



Now sat the King of Light again upon his starry throne 
And bright Ahania bow'd herself before his splendid feet. 
O Urizen, look on thy wife, that like a mournful stream 
Embraces round thy knees and wets her bright hair with her tears. 

8 Why sighs my lord ? Are not the morning stars obedient sons ? 
Do they not bow their bright heads at thy voice, at thy command 
Do they not fly into their stations and return their light to thee ? 
The immortal Atmospheres are thine. There thou art seen in glory 
Surrounded by the ever-changing daughters of the light. 

10 Thou sits in harmony, for God hath set thee over all. 
Why wilt thou look upon futurity darkening present joy P 

She ceased. The Prince of Light obscured the splendour of his crown, 
Infolded in thick clouds from which his mighty voice went forth. 

bright Ahania, a boy is born of the dark ocean 

l' Whom Urizen doth serve with light replenishing his darkness. 

1 am set here a king of trouble, commanded here to serve 
And do my ministry to those who eat of my wide Table. 
All this is mine, yet I must serve, and that Prophetic boy 
Must grow up to command his prince, and all his kingly power. 

20 But Vala shall become a worm in Enitharmon's womb 
Laying her seed upon the fibres, soon to issue forth, 
And Luvah in the Loins of Los a dark and furious death. 
Alas for me I What will become of me at that dread time ? 

Ahania bowed her head and wept seven days before the King. 
28 And on the eighth day when his clouds unfolded from his throne 
She raised her bright head sweet perfumed, and with heavenly voice, 

Prince, the Eternal One hath set thee leader of his works, 



NIGHT III. 33 

Raise then thy radiant eyes to him, raise thy obedient hands, 
And comfort shall descend from heaven into thy darkening clouds. 

30 Leave all futurity to him. Resume thy fields of light. 

Why didst thou listen to the voice of Luvah that dread morn 
To give the immortal steeds of light to his deceitful hands ? 
No longer now obedient to thy will, thou art compelled 
To forge the curbs of iron and brass, to build them iron mangers. 

85 To feed them with intoxication from the wine-press of Luvah. 
Till the Divine Vision and Fruition is quite obliterated. 
They call thy lions to the field of blood. They rouse thy tigers 
Out of the halls of justice, till their dens thy windows framed 
Golden and beautiful, but unlike those sweet fields of bliss 

40 Where liberty was justice, and eternal science was mercy. 
Then, oh my dear lord, listen to Ahania, hear this vision, 
The vision of Ahania in the slumbers of Urizen 
When Urizen slept in the porch and the Ancient Man was smitten. 

The darkening Man walked on the steps of fire before his halls 
45 And Vala walked with him in dreams of soft deluding slumber. 
He looked up and saw the Prince of Light with splendour faded, 
But saw not Los nor Enitharmon ; Luvah hid them in shadow 
Of a soft cloud outstretched across, and Luvah dwelt in this cloud. 

The Man ascended mourning into the splendour of his palace, 

50 Above him rose a shadow from his wearied intellect 

Of living gold, pure, perfect, holy j in white linen pure it hovered, 

A sweet entrancing self-delusion, a watery vision of Man, 

Soft, exulting in existence, all the Man absorbing. 

Man fell upon his face postrate before the watery shadow 

85 Saying, oh Lord, whence is this change ? Thou knowest I am nothing. 
And Vala trembled and covered her face and her locks were spread 

on the pavement. 

I heard astonished at the vision, and my heart trembled within me 
I heard the voice of the slumberous man, and thus he spoke 
Idolatrous to his own shadow, words of eternity uttering, 

3 



34 NIGHT III. 

60 Oh, I am nothing if I enter into judgment with thee. 

If thou withdraw thy breath I die, and vanish into Hades ; 

If thou dost lay thy hand upon me, behold I am silent ; 

If thou withhold thy hand I perish like a fallen leaf ; 

Or I am nothing, and to nothing must return again. 
65 If thou withdraw thy breath, behold I am oblivion. 

The shadowy voice was silent, but the cloud hung o'er their heads 
In golden wreathes, the sorrow of Man, and the balmy drops fell down 
And lo ! that Son of Man, that shadowy spirit of the Fallen One, 
Luvah, descended from the cloud. In terror Man arose. . 
70 Indignant rose the Awful Man and turned his back on Vala. 

We heard the voice of the Fallen One starting from his sleep. 
Whence is this voice crying Enion that soundeth in my ears ? 
Oh, cruel pity. Oh, dark deceit, can love seek for dominion ? 
Why roll thy clouds in sickening mists. I can no longer hide 
' 5 The dismal vision of mine eyes. Oh, love ! Oh, life ! Oh, light ! 
Prophetic dreads urge me to speak. Eternity is before me. 
Like a dark lamp. Eternal death haunts all my expectations. 
Bent from Eternal Brotherhood we die and are no more. 

And Luvah strove to gain dominion over the Ancient Man. 

80 They strove together over the body where Vala was enclosed. 
And the dark body of Man left prostrate on the crystal pavement 
Covered with boils from head to foot, the terrible smitings of Luvah. 
Then frowned the Fallen Man and put forth Luvah from his presence. 
I heard him ; frown not, Urizen, but listen to my vision 

85 Saying, Go die the death of Man for Vala the sweet Wanderer. 

I will turn the volutions of your ears outward, and bend your nostrils 
Downward, and your fluxile eyes englobed roll round in fear, 
Your writhing lips and tongue shrink up into a narrow circle 
Till into narrow forms you creep. Go take your fiery way 

90 And learn what it is to absorb the Man, you spirits of pity and love. 

Oh, Urizen, why art thou pale at the visions of Albion ? 
Listen to her who loves thee, lest we also are driven away. 



NIGHT III. 35 

They heard the voice and flew, swift as the winter setting son 

And now the Human Blood flow'd high. I saw that Luvah and Vala 

Went down the Human Heart where Paradise and its joys abound, 

In jealous fears and rage, and flames rolled round their fervid feet, 

And the vast form of Nature like a serpent played before them, 

And as they went in folding fires and thunders of the deep 

Vala shrunk in like the dark sea that leaves its slimy banks, 

And from her bosom Luvah fell far as the East and West 

And the vast form of Nature, like a serpent, rolled between. 

Whether this is Jerusalem or Babylon we know not. 

All is confusion, all is tumult, and we alone are escaped. 

Albion closed the western gate, and shut America out 
105 By the Atlantic, for a curse, and for a hidden horror, 

And for an altar of victims offered to Sin and Repentance. 

Am I not God, said Urizen ? Who is equal to me ? 
Do I not stretch the heavens abroad, and fold them up like a garment ? 
He spoke, mustering his heavy clouds around him, black, opaque. 
110 Then thunders rolled around, and lightnings darted to and fro ; 

His visage changed to darkness, and his strong right hand came forth 
To cast Ahania to the earth. He seized her by the hair, 
And threw her from the steps of ice that froze around his throne, 
Saying, Art thou also become like Yala ? Thus I cast thee out. 

116 Shall the feminine indolent bliss, the indulgent self of weariness, 
The passive idle sleep, the enormous night and darkness and death, 
Set herself up to give her laws to this active masculine virtue ? 
Thou little diminutive portion that darest be a counterpart, 
Thy passivity, thy laws of obedience and insincerity, 
Are my abhorrence. Wherefore hast thou taken this fair form ? 
Whence is this power given thee ? Once thou was in my breast 
A sluggish current of dim waters, on whose verdant margin 
A cavern shagged with horrid shades, dark, cool and deadly, where 
I laid my head in the hot noon, after the broken clods 
25 Had wearied me. There I laid my plough, and there my horses fed : 

3 * 



36 NIGHT III. 

And thou hast risen with thy moist locks into a watery image, 
Reflecting all my indolence, my weakness and my death, 
To weigh me down beneath the grave into Non-Entity, 
Where Luvah strives, scorned by Vala, age after age wandering, 
130 Shrinking and shrinking from her Lord and calling him the Tempter. 
And art thou also become like Vala ? Thus I cast thee out. 

So loud in thunder spoke the King, folded in dark despair, 
And threw Ahania from his bosom obdurate. She fell like lightning. 
Then fled the sons of Urizen from his thund'rous throne, petrified ; 
135 They fled to East and West and left the North and South of Heaven. 

A crash ran through the universe ; the bounds of Destiny were broken. 
The bounds of Destiny crashed direful, and the swelling sea 
Burst from its bonds in whirlpools fierce, and roaring with human voice, 
Triumphing even to the stars at bright Ahania's fall. 

140 Down from the dismal North the Prince of thunders and thick clouds, 
As when the thunder-bolt downfalleth on the appointed place, 
Fell down rushing, ruining, thundering, shuddering, 
Into the caverns of the grave and places of human seed, 
Where the impressions of despair and hope enroot for ever 

146 A world of darkness ; Ahania fell far into nonentity. 

She continued falling. Loud the crash continued, loud and hoarse. 
From the crash roared a blue sulphurous fire, and from the flame 
A dolorous groan that struck with dumbness all confusion, 
Swallowing up the horrible din in agony on agony. 

160 Through the confusion, like a crack across from immense to immense, 
Loud, strong, a universal groan of death louder was heard 
Than all the elements, deafened and rendered worse 
Than Urizen and all his hosts in curst despair down rushing. 
But from the dolorous groan on high a shadow of smoke appeared, 

155 And human bones rattling together in the smoke and stamping 

The nether abyss, and gnashing in fierce despair, and panting in sobs, 
Thick, short, incessant, bursting, sobbing, deep despairing, stamping, 
Struggling to utter the voice of man, to take features of man, 
To take the limbs of man. At length, emerging from the smoke 



NIGHT lit. 37 

160 Of TTrizen dashed in pieces from his precipitate fall, 

Tharmas reared up his hands and stood on the affrighted ocean, 
The dead reared up his voice and stood on the resounding shore, 

Crying : Fury in my limbs ! Destruction in my bone and marrow ! 
My skull riven into filaments, my ears into sea-jellies, 

166 Floating upon the tide, wander bubbling and bubbling, 
Uttering lamentations and begetting little monsters 
Who sit mocking upon the little pebbles of the tide 
In all my rivers, and on my dried shells that now the fish 
Have quite forsaken. Oh, fool ! fool ! to lose my sweetest bliss. 

170 Where art thon, Enion ? Ah, too near thou seemest, too far off, 
And yet too near, dashed down I send thee into distant darkness 
Far as my strength can hurl thee ; wander there, and laugh and play, 
Scream and fall off and laugh at Tharmas, lovely summer beauty, 
Till winds rend thee into shivers as thou hast rended me. 

175 So Tharmas bellowed on the ocean, thund'ring, sobbing, bursting. 
The bounds of Destiny were broken, and hatred now began 
Instead of love to Enion. Enion, blind and age-bent, 
Plunged into the cold billows, living a life in midst of waters. 
In terrors she withered away to Entuthon Benython, 

180 A world of deep darkness where all things in horror are rooted. 

These are the words of Enion, heard from the cold wave of despair : 
Oh, Tharmas, I had lost thee when I hoped that I had found thee ; 
Ob, Tharmas, do not thou destroy me quite, but let 
A little shadow, but a little showery form of Enion, 

185 Be near the loved terror. Let me still remain. Do thou 
Thy righteous doom upon me ; only let me hear thy voice. 
Driven by thy rage I wander like a cloud into the deep 
Where never yet existence came ; there losing all my life, 
I back return, weaker and weaker. Consume me not away 

190 In thy great wrath, though I have sinned, though I have rebelled. 
Make me not as the things forgotten, as they had not been. 



38 KIOHT HI. 

Tharmas replied, riding on storms, his voice in thunder rolled : 
Image of grief, thy fading lineaments make my eyelids fail. 
What have I done ? Both rage and mercy are alike to me ; 

196 Looking upon thee, image of faint waters, I recoil 

From my fierce rage into thy semblance. Enion, return. 
Why does thy piteous face evanish like a rainy cloud 
Melting, a shower of falling tears, nothing but tears ! Enion ! 
Substanceless, voiceless, weeping, vanished, nothing but tears, Enion ! 

200 Art thou for ever vanished from the watery eyes of Tharmas. 

Rage, rage shall never from my bosom. Winds and waters of woe 
Consuming, all to the end consuming ! Love and hope are ended. 

For now no more remained of Enion in the distant air, 

Only a voice eternal wailing in the elements. 
205 Where Enion, blind and age-bent, wandered, Ahania wanders now. 

She wanders in eternal fear of falling into the indefinite ; 

For her bright eyes behold the abyss. Sometimes a little sleep 

Weighs down her eyelids. Then she falls ; then, starting back in fear, 
209 Sleepless to wander round, repelled on the margin of nonentity. 



END OF THE THIRD NIGHT. 



But Tharmas rode on the dark abyss. The voice of Tharmas rolled 

Over the heavy deluge. He saw Los and Enitharmon emerge 

In strength and brightness from the abyss. His bowels yearned over 

them. 

They rose in strength above the heaving deluge, in mighty scorn, 
5 Red as the sun in the bright morning of the bloody day, 
Tharmas beheld them, and his bowels yearned over them. 

He said : Ah, Enion, wherefore do I feel such love and pity ? 

How is this ? All my hope is gone ! Enion for ever fled ! 

Like a famished eagle, eyeless, raging in the vast expanse. 
10 Incessant tears are now my food, incessant tears and rage. 

Deathless for ever now I wander, seeking oblivion 

In torrents of despair in vain. For if I plunge beneath, 

Stifling I live. If dashed to pieces from a rocky height, 

I re-unite in endless torment. Would I had never risen 
15 From death's cold sleep beneath the bottom of the raging ocean. 

And cannot those who once have loved ever forget their love ? 

Are love and rage the same passion ? They are the same in me. 

Are those who love like those who died, risen again from death, 

Immortal in immortal torment never to be delivered ? 
20 Is it not possible that one risen again from death 

Can die ? When dark despair comes over, can I not then 

Flow down into the sea and slumber in oblivion ? 

Deformed I see these lineaments of ungratified desire. 

The all-powerful curse of an honest man be upon Urizen and Luvah. 
25 But thou, my son, glorious in brightness, comforter of Tharmas, 

Go forth, rebuild this universe beneath my indignant power, 

An universe of Death and Decay ! Let Enitharmon's hands 



40 NIGHT IV. 

Weave soft delusive forms of man above my watery world, 
Renew these ruined souls of men through Earth, Sea, Air and Fire, 
30 To waste in endless corruption, renew those I will destroy. 
Perhaps Enion may resume some little semblance yet 
To ease my pangs of heart and to restore some peace to Tharmas. 

Los answered in his furious pride, sparks issuing from his hair, 

Hitherto shalt thou come, no further; here thy proud waves cease. 
35 We have drunk up the Eternal Man by our unbounded power. 

Beware lest we also drink up thee, rough Demon of the Waters. 

Our God is TJrizen, the King, King of the Heavenly hosts. 

We have no other god but him, thou father of worms and clay. 

And he is fallen into the deep, rough Demon of the waters, 
40 And Los remains God over all, weak father of worms and clay. 

I know I was Urthona, keeper of the gates of Heaven, 

But now I am all-powerful Los, and Urthona is but my shadow. 

Doubting stood Tharmas in the solemn darkness. His dim eyes 
Swam in red tears. He reared his waves above the head of Los 
15 In wrath ; but pitying, back withdrew again with many a sigh. 
Now he resolved to destroy Los, and now his tears rolled down. 

In scorn stood Los, red sparks of blighting from his furious head 
Flew o'er the waves of Tharmas. Pitying, Tharmas stayed his waves, 
For Enitharmon shrieked amain, crying : Oh, my sweet world, 
60 Built by the Architect divine, whose love to Los and Enitharmon, 
Thou rash abhorred Demon in thy fury hast o'erthrown ! 
What Sovereign Architect, said Tharmas, dare my will control ? 
For, if I will, I urge these waters : if I will, they sleep 
In peace beneath my awful frown. My will shall be my law. 

M So saying, in a wave he raped bright Enitharmon far 

Away from Los, but covered her with softest brooding care 
On a broad wave in the far west, balming her bleeding wound. 
Oh, how Los howled at the rending asunder ! All the fibres rent 
Where Enitharmon joined to his left side, in grinding pain. 



IV. 41 

60 He, falling on the rocks, bellowed his dolour, till the blood 
Stanched. Then in ululation wailed his woes upon the wind. 

But Tharmas called to the Dark Spectre, who upon the shores 
With dislocated limbs had fallen. The spectre rose in pain, 
A shadow blue, obscure and dismal, like a statue of lead 

65 Bent by its fall from a high tower, the dolorous shadow rose. 
Go forth, said Tharmas, works of joy are thine : obey and live. 
So shall the spongy marrow issuing from thy splintered bones 
Bonify, and thou shalt have rest, when this thy labour is done. 
Go forth, bear Enitharmon back to the Eternal Prophet, 

70 Build her a bower in the midst of all my dashing waves ; 
Make first a resting place for Los and Enitharmon, then 
Thou shalt have rest. If thou refusest, dashed abroad on all 
My waves thy limbs shall separate in rottenness, and thou 
Become a prey to all my demons of despair and hope. 

75 The Spectre of Urthona, seeing Enitharmon, writhed 

His cloudy form in jealous fears, and muttering thunders hoarse 
And casting round thick glooms, his fierce pangs of heart thus uttered : 

Tharmas, I know thee how are we altered, our beauty decayed ! 
But still I know thee, though in this horrible ruin whelmed. 

80 Thou, once the mildest son of heaven, art now a Rage become, 
A terror to all living things. Think not I am ignorant 
That thou art risen from the dead, or that, my power forgot, 
I slumber here in weak repose. I remember the day, 
The day of terror and abhorrence ...... 

85 When fleeing from the battle, thou fleeting, and, like the raven 
Of dawn, outstretching an expanse where no expanse had been, 
Drewest all the sons of Beulah into thy dread vortex, following 
The eddying spirit down the hills of Beulah. All my sons 
Stood round me at the anvil, where, new-heated, the red wedge 

90 Of iron glowed furious, prepared for spades and mattocks hard. 
Hearing the symphonies of war loud sounding, all my sons 
Fled from my side. Then pangs smote me unknown before. I felt 
My loins begin to break forth into veiny pipes and writhe 



42 NIGHT TV. 

Before mo in the wind, englobing, trembling with vibrations, 
95 The bloody mass began to animate. I, bending over, 
Wept bitter tears incessant, still beholding how the form 
Dividing and dividing from my loins, a weak and piteons 
Soft cloud of snow, a female pale. I saw, and soft embraced 
My counterpart, and called it love. I named her Enitharmon. 
100 But found myself and her together issuing down the tide 

Which now our rivers were become, delving through caverns huge 
Of gory blood, struggling to bo delivered from our bonds. 
She strove in vain. Not so Urthona strove, for, breaking forth, 
A shadow blue, obscure and dismal, from the breathing nostrils 
105 Of Enion I issued to air, divided from Enitharmon. 

I howled in sorrow. I beheld thee rotting upon the rocks. 

I, pitying, hovered over theo ; I protected thy ghastly corse 

From vultures of the deep ; then wherefore shouldst thou rage as now 

Against me who thee guarded in the night of death from harm ? 

110 Tharmas replied, Art thou Urthona, my friend, my old companion, 
With whom I lived in happiness before that deadly night 
When Urizen gave the horses of light into the hands of Lnvah ? 
Thou knowest not what Tharmas knows. Oh ! I could tell thee tales 
That would enrap thee as it has enrapped me, even 

115 From death in wrath and fury. But now, come, arise, bear back 
The loved Enitharmon. Thou hast her here before thine eyes. 
But my sweet Enion is vanished, and I never more 
Shall see her, unless thou, Shadow, will protect this son 
Of Enion, and him assist to bind the fallen king, 

120 Lest he should rise again from death in all his dreary furor. 
Bind him. Take Enitharmon for thy sweet reward, while I 
In vain am driven on false hope, the sister of despair. 

Groaning the Terror rose, and drave his solid rocks before 
Upon the tide, till underneath the feet of Los a world, 
125 Dark, dreadful rose, and Enitharmon lay at Los's feet. 

The dolorous shadow joyed. Weak hope appeared around his head 
Tharmas before Los stood, and thus the voice of Tharmas rolled. 



NIGHT IV. 43 

Now all comes into the power of Tharmas. TJrizen is fallen, 
And Luvah hidden in the elemental forms of life and death. 

130 Urthona is my son. Oh, Los, thou art Urthona, and Tharmas 
Is God. The Eternal Man is sealed, never to be delivered. 
I roll my floods over his body. My billows and waves pass over him, 
The sea encompasses him and monsters of the deep are his companions, 
Dreamer of furious oceans, cold sleeper of weeds and shells 

135 Thy eternal form shall never renew. My uncertain prevails against 

thee, 

Yet though I rage, God over all, a portion of my life 
That in eternal fields in comfort wandered with my flocks 
At noon, and laid her head upon my wearied bosom at night 
She is divided. She is vanished, even like Luvah and Yala. 

140 Oh, why did foul ambition seize thee, TJrizen, Prince of Light ? 
And thou, oh Luvah, Prince of Love, till Tharmas was divided ? 
And I, what can I now behold but an Eternal Death ? 
Before my eyes, and an Eternal weary work to strive 
Against the monstrous forms to breed among my silent waves, 

145 Is this to be a God ? For rather would I be a Man, 

To know sweet science, and to do with simple companions 
Sitting beneath a tent and viewing sheepfolds and soft pastures. 
Take thou the hammer of Urthona. Rebuild these furnaces. 
Dost thou refuse ? Mind I the sparks that issue from thy hair ? 

150 I w in compel thee to rebuild by these my furious waves 

Death choose or life. Thou strugglest in my waters now. Choose life, 
And all the elements shall serve thee to their soothing flutes. 
Their sweet inspiring lyres thy labour shall administer, 
And they to thee only resist not. Faint not thou, my son, 

155 Now thou dost know what 'tis to strive against the god of waters. 

So saying, Tharmas on his furious chariots of the deep 
Departed far into the unknown and left a wondrous void 
Round Los. Afar his waters bore on all sides round with noise 
Of wheels and horses' hoofs, and trumpets, horns and clarions. 
160 Terrified, Los beheld the ruins of Urizen beneath 



44 NtGHT IV. 

A horrible chaos to his eyes, a formless immeasurable death 
Whirling up broken rocks on high into the dismal air, 
And fluctuating all beneath in eddies of molten fluid. 

Then Los with terrible hands seized on the Round Furnaces 

165 Of Urizen : enormous work ; he builded them anew, 

Labour of ages in the darkness and the wars of Tharmas 
And Los formed anvils of hard iron petrific, for his blows 
Petrify with incessant heating many a rock, a planet, 
But Urizen slept in a stony stupor in the nether abyss, 

170 A dreamful, horrible state in tossings on his icy bed 
Freezing to solid all beneath. His grey oblivious form 
Stretched over the immense heaves in strong shudders silent 
In brooding contemplations stretching out from north to south 
In mighty power. Bound him always Los rolled furious, 

175 His thund'rous wheels from furnace to furnace tending diligent 
The contemplative Terror, frightened in his sorrowing sphere. 
Frightened with cold infectious madness. In his hands the thundering 
Hammer of Urthona, forming under his heavy hand, 
The days and years in chains of iron round the limbs of Urizen, 

180 Linked hour to hour, and day to night, night to day, year to year, 
In periods of pulsative furor. Mills he formed and works 
Of many wheels resistless in the power of dark Urthona. 

But Enitharmon wrapped in clouds wailed loud, for as Los beat 
The anvils of Urthona link by link the chain of sorrow 

185 Warping upon the winds and whirling round in the dark deep, 
Lashed on the limbs of Enitharmon, and the sulphur fires 
Belched from the furnaces wreathed round her chained in ceaseless fire. 
The lovely female howled, and Urizen beneath deep groaned 
Deadly, beneath the hammers beating, grateful to the ears 

190 Of Los absorbed in dire revenge. He drank with joy the cries 
Of Enitharmon, and the groans of Urizen, fuel for wrath, 
And for his pity secret, feeding on thoughts of cruelty. 

The Spectre wept at his dire labours when from ladles huge 
He poured the molten iron round the limbs of Enitharmon. 



NIGHT IV. 45 

I 95 But when he poured it round the bones of Urizen, he laughed 
Hollow upon the hollow wind, his shadowy form obeying 
The voice of Los, compelled he laboured round the furnaces. 

And thus began the binding of Urizen, day and night in fear. 
Circling round the Demon, dark with howlings and dismay, 

800 The prophet of Eternity beat on iron links and brass, 

And as he beat, the hurtling Demon terrified at the shape 
Enslaved humanity put on, became what he beheld 
Raging against Tharmas, his god, and uttering aloud 
Ambiguous words, blasphemous, filled with envy, firm resolved 

205 On hate eternal in his vast disdain he laboured beating 

The links of fate, link after link, an endless chain of sorrow. 
The Eternal Mind bounded, began to roll, Eddies of wrath 
Bound and round, and the sulphurous foam now surging thick, 
Settled, a bright and shining lake, as clear and white as snow. 

210 Forgetfulness, dumbness, necessity, in chains of the mind locked up, 
In fetters of iron shrinking, disorganized, rent from Eternity, 
Los beat on his fetters and heated his furnaces, 

And poured iron solder and solder of brass. 

Restless, the immortal, enchained, heaving dolorous, 
215 Anguished, unbearable, till a roof, shaggy, wild, enclosed 

In an orb his fountain of thought. 

In a horrible, dreamful slumber like the linked chain, 

A vast spine writhed in torment upon the wind, 

Shooting out pained roots like a bending cavern, 
220 And bones of solidness froze over all his nerves of joy. 

And a first age passed over and a state of dismal woe. 

From the curves of his pointed spine down sunk with fright, 
A red round globe hot burning, deep down into the abyss 
Panting, conglobing, trembling, shooting out ten thousand branches 

225 Around his solid bones, and a second age passed over him. 
In harrowing fear rolling his nervous brain shot branches 



46 NIGHT IV. 

Round the branches of his heart, .... 
On high into two little orbs hiding in two little caves, 
Hiding carefully from the wind. His eyes beheld the deep, 
230 And a third age passed over and a state of dismal woo. 

The pangs of hope began, a heavy pain striving and struggling, 
Two ears in close volutions from beneath his orbs of vision 
Shot spiring out and petrified, 
And a fourth age passed over and a state of dismal woe. 

835 In ghastly torment sick, hanging upon the wind, 
Two nostrils bent down to the deeps .... 
And a fifth age passed over, and a state of dismal woe. 

In ghastly torment sick, within his ribs bloated round 
A craving hungry cavern ; thence arose his channelled throat, 
240 Like a red flame a tongue of hunger and of thirst appeared, 
And a sixth age passed over and a state of dismal woe. 

Enraged and stifled with torment, he threw his right arm to the north, 
His left arm to the south, shooting out in anguish deep, 
And his feet stamped the nether abyss in trembling and dismay, 
245 And a seventh age passed over and a state of dismal woe. 

The Council of God on high watching the Body 
Of Man clothed in Luvah's robes of blood, beheld, and wept, 
Descending over Beulah's mild moon-covered regions, 
The daughters of Beulah saw the Divine Vision comforted. 
250 And as a double female form, loveliness and perfection 

They bowed their head and worshipped, and with mild voice spoke 
these words : 

Lord Saviour, if Thou hadst been here our brother had not died, 
And now we know that whatsoever thou wilt ask of God 
He will give it Thee, for we are weak women and dare not lift 
266 Our eyes to thy Divine pavilion, therefore in mercy thou 
Appearest clothed in Luvah's garments that we may behold 



NIGHT IV. 47 

And live. Behold Eternal Death, is in Beulah ; behold 
We perish and shall not be found unless thou grant a place 
In which may be hidden, under the shadow of wings. 
2GO if we wno are but for a time and who pass away in winter 
Behold these wonders of Eternity we shall consume. 

Such were the words of Beulah, of the feminine emanations. 
The Empyrean groaned throughout. All Eden was darkened. 
The corse of Man lay on the rock. The Sea of Time and Space 
2<55 Beat round the rocks in mighty waves, and as a polypus 
That vegetates beneath the sea, the limbs of man vegetated 
In monstrous forms of death, a human polypus of death. 

The Saviour mild and gentle bent over the corse of death, 
Saying, If ye will but believe your brother shall rise again. 
270 And first he found the limit of opacity and named it Satan 

In Albion's bosom, for in every human bosom these limits stand. 
And next he found the limit of contraction, and named it Adam, 
While yet those beings were not born nor knew of good or evil. 

Then wondrously the deeps beneath felt the Divine hand. Limit 
275 Was put to Eternal Death. Los felt the limit and saw 

The finger of God go forth and touch the seventh furnace in terror. 
And Los beheld the hand of God over his furnaces 
Beneath the deeps in dismal darkness beneath immensity. 

In terror Los shrank from his task. His great hammer 
280 Fell from his hand, his fires hid their mighty limbs in smoke. 

For with noises ruinous, hurtling and clashing and groans, 

The immortal endured, though bound in a deadly sleep. 

Pale terror seized the eyes of Los as labouring he beat round. 

The hurtling demon terrified as he beheld the shape 
285 Enslaved Humanity put on : he became what he beheld ; 

He became what he was doing and he was himself transformed. 

Spasms seized his muscular fibres writhing from his lips 

Unwilling moved as Urizen howled : his loins wave like the sea. 



48 



NIGHT IV. 



293 



At Knitharmoii's shrieks his knees each other smote as he looked 
With stony eyes on Urizen, and then swift writhed his neck 
Involuntary to the conch where Enitharmon lay. 
The bones of Urizen hurtle in the wind. The bones of Los and his 

iron sinews bend like lead and fold 
Into unusual forms, dancing, and howling, stamping the abyss. 



END OP THE FOURTH NIGHT. 



gqfct 



Infected, mad, he danced on his mountains high and dark as heaven 
Now fixed into one steadfast bulk his features stonify. 
From his mouth curses, from his eyes issuing sparks of blighting, 
Beside the anvil cold he danced with the hammer of Urthona. 
5 Terrific, pale, Enitharmon stretched on the dreary earth, 
Felt her immortal limbs freeze, stiffening, pale, inflexible. 
His feet shrunk withering, from the deeps shrinking and withering, 
And Enitharmon shrunk up, all their fibres withering 
As plants withered by winter, leaves, stems, and roots decaying 

10 Melt into thin air, while the seed, driven by the furious wind, 
Bests on the distant mountain tops, so Los and Enitharmon 
Shrunk into fixed space stood trembling on a rocky cliff, 
Yet beauty, majesty, and bulk remained, but unexpansive. 
As far as highest Zenith from the lowest Nadir they shrunk, 

15 Los from the furnaces a space immense, and left the cold 

Prince of Light bound in chains of intellect among the furnaces. 
But all the furnaces were out and the bellows had ceased to blow. 
He stood trembling and Enitharmon clung around his knees, 
Their senses unexpansive in one steadfast bulk remained. 

20 The night blew cold, and Enitharmon shrieked on the dismal wind. 
Her pale hands cling around her husband, and over her weak head 
Shadows of Eternal Death sit in the leaden air. 

But the soft pipe, the flute and viol, organ, harp and cymbal, 
And the sweet sound of silver voices calm the weary couch 
25 Of Enitharmon, but her groans drown the immortal harps. 
Loud and more loud the living music floats upon the air, 
Faint and more faint the daylight waxes ; wheels of turning darkness 
Began in solemn revolutions. Earth convulsed with pangs 
Rocked to and fro and cried out sore at the groans of Enitharmon. 

4 



50 NIGHT V. 

30 Still the faint harps and silver voices calm the weary conch, 

Bnt from the caves of deepest night, ascending in clouds of mist. 
The winter spreads his wide black wings across from pole to pole, 
Grim frost beneath, and terrible snow linked in a marriage chain 
Began a dismal dance. The winds around on pointed rocks 

85 Settled like bats innumerable, ready to fly abroad. 

The groans of Enitharmon shake the skies, the labouring earth, 
Till from her heart, rending his way, a terrible child sprang forth 
In thunder, smoke, and sullen flames, and bowlings, fury and blood. 

Soon as his burning eyes were opened, looking on the abyss, 
40 The horrible trumpets of the deep bellowed with bitter blasts, 

The enormous demons woke and howled around the new-born king, 
Crying Luvah, King of Love, thou art the king of rage and death. 

Urizen cast deep darkness round him, raging, Luvah poured 
The spears of Urizen from chariots round the eternal tent. 
45 Discord began, and yells and cries shook the wide firmament 

Where is sweet Vala, gloomy prophet ? Where the lovely form 

That drew the body of Man from heaven into this dark abyss ? 

Soft tears and sighs, where are you ? Come forth ! Shout on bloody 

fields. 
Show thy soul, Vala ! show thy bow and quiver of secret fires. 

50 Draw thy bow, Vala, from the depth of Hell, thy black bow draw, 
And twang the bowstring to our Hautbois ; let thine arrows black 
Sing in the sky as once they sang upon the hills of light 
When dark Urthona wept in torment of the secret pain, 
He wept and he divided and he laid his gloomy head 

66 Down on the rock of Eternity in darkness of the deep, 

Torn by black storms and ceaseless torrents of consuming fire. 
Within his breast his fiery sons chained down and filled with cursing, 
And breathing terrible blood and vengeance, gnashing his teeth with 

pain, 
Let loose the Enormous Spirit on the darkness of the deep, 



NIGHT V. 51 

60 And his dark wife, that once fair crystal form divinely clear, 
Within his ribs producing serpents whose souls are flames of fire. 
But now the times return upon thee. Enitharmon's womb 
Now holds thee, soon to issue forth. Sound, clarion of war, 
Call Vala from her close recess in all her dark deceit, 

65 Then rage on rage shall fierce redound out of her crystal quiver. 

So sang the demons round red Ore, and round faint Enitharmon. 
Sweat and blood stood on the limbs of Los. In globes his fiery eyelids 
Faded. He roused, he seized the wonder in his hand, and went 
Shuddering and weeping through the gloom and down into the deeps. 



70 



And Enitharmon nursed his fiery child in the dark deeps 

Sitting in darkness : over her Los mourned in anguish fierce. 

Covered with gloom this fiery boy grew, feeding on the milk 

Of Enitharmon. Los around her builded pillars of iron, 

And brass, and silver, and gold, fourfold, in dark prophetic fear, 

For now he feared Eternal Death and uttermost extinction : 

He builded Golgonooza on the lake of Udan Adan. 

Upon the limit of translucence then he builded Laban. 

Tharmas laid the foundation stone ; Los finished it in howling woe. 



But when fourteen summers, and winters, had revolved over 
80 This solemn habitation, Los beheld the ruddy boy 

Embracing his bright mother, and beheld malignant fires 

In his young eyes, discerning plain that Ore plotted his death. 

Grief rose upon his ruddy brows. A tightening girdle grew 

Around his bosom like a bloody cord. In secret sobs 
85 He burst it, but next morn another girdle soon succeeds 

Around his bosom. Every day he viewed the fiery youth, 

With silent fear, and his immortal cheeks drew deadly pale. 

Till many a morn and many a night passed over in dire woe. 

Forming a girdle in the day, and bursting it at night 
90 The girdle was always formed by day : but night 'twas burst in twain, 

Falling down on the rock, an iron chain link by link locked. 

4 * 



52 NIGHT T. 

Enitharmon beheld the bloody chain made of the nights and days, 
Depending from the bosom of Los, and how with grinding pain 
He went each morning to his labours with the spectre dark, 

95 Called it the chain of jealousy. Now Los began to speak 
His woes aloud to Enitharmon ; since he could not hide 
His uncouth plague he seized the boy in his immortal hands, 
While Enitharmon followed him, weeping in dismal woe, 
Up to the iron mountain top, and there the jealous chain 

100 Fell from his bosom on the mountain, and the spectre dark 

Held the fierce boy. Los nailed him down, binding over his limbs 
The accursed chain. how bright Enitharmon howled and cried 
Over her son. Obdurate, Los bound down his loved joy. 

The hammer of Urthona smote the rivets in terror of brass 
106 Tenfold. The Demon's rage flamed forth tenfold with rending fires, 
Roaring, resounding, loud, loud, louder, ever louder, fired, 
The darkness, warring with waves of Tharmas, and snows of Urizen, 
Crackling the flames went up with fury from the immortal Demon. 
Surrounded with flames the Demon grew, loud howling in his fires 
110 Los folded Enitharmon in a cold white cloud, in fear 

Then led her down into the deeps, and into his labyrinth, 
Giving the spectre eternal charge over the howling fiend 
Concentred into love of Parent, storgeous appetite, craving. 

His limbs bound down mock at his chains, for over them a flame 
116 Of circling fire unceasing plays to feed them with life, and bring 
The virtues of the Eternal Worlds. Ten thousand thousand spirits 
Of life lament around the Demon, going forth and returning. 
At his enormous call they flee into the heavens of heavens, 
And back return with wine and food, or dive into the deeps 
120 To bring the thrilling joys of sense to quell his ceaseless rage. 
His eyes, the lights of his large soul, contract, or else expand. 
Contracted they behold the secrets of the infinite mountains, 
The veins of gold and silver, and the hidden things of Vala, 
Whatever grows from its pure bud, or wreathes a fragrant soul, 
125 Expanded they behold the terrors of the Sun and Moon, 



NIGHT V. 53 

The elemental planets, and the orbs of eccentric fire. 
His nostrils breathe a fiery flame, his locks are like the forests 
Of wild beasts, there the lion glares, the tiger and wolf howl there, 
And there the eagle hides her young in cliffs and precipices. 

130 His bosom is like the starry heavens expanded. All the stars 

Sing round. There waves the harvest ; the vintage rejoices there. 
The springs flow into rivers of delight. Spontaneous flowers 
Drink, laugh and sing ; the grasshopper, the emmet and the fly, 
The golden moth builds there a house and spreads her silken bed. 

135 His loins inwove with silken fires are like a furnace fierce, 

As the strong bull in summer time when bees sing round the heath, 
When the herds low after the shadow and after the water-spring. 
The murmurous flocks cover the mountains and shine along the valley, 
His knees are rocks of adamant, ruby, and emerald, 

140 Spirits of strength in palaces rejoice in golden armour 

Armed with the spear and shield they drink and rejoice over the slain, 
Such is the Demon, such his terror on the nether deep. 

But when returned to Grolgonooza Los and Enitharmon 

Felt all the sorrow parents feel, they wept toward one another. 

145 And Los repented that he had chained Ore upon the mountain. 
And Enitharmon's tears prevailed. Parental love returned. 
Though terrible his dread of that infernal chain, they rose 
At midnight hasting to their much beloved care. 
Nine days they travelled through the gloom of Entuthon Benython. 

160 Los taking Enitharmon by the hand led her along 

The dismal vales and up to the iron mountain tops where Ore 
Howled in the furious wind. He thought to give to Enitharmon 
Her son in tenfold joy, and to compensate for her tears 
Even if his own death resulted, so much pity him pained. 

156 But when they came to the dark rock and to the spectrous cave, 
Lo, the young limbs had strucken root into the rock, and strong 
Fibres had from the chain of jealousy inwove themselves 
In a bright vegetation round the rock and round the cave, 
And over the immortal limbs of the terrible fiery boy. 



54 KIOHT V. 

160 In vain they strove now to unchain, in vain with bitter tears 
To melt the chain of jealousy. Not Enitharmon's death, 
Nor the consummating of Los could ever melt the chain. 
Nor could unroot the infernal fibres from their rocky bed. 
Nor all Urthona's strength, nor all the power of Luvah's bulls, 

166 Though they each morning drag the unwilling sun out of the deep, 
Could uproot the infernal chain, for it had strucken root. 
Into the iron rock, and grew a chain beneath the earth, 
Even to the centre, wrapping round the centre and the limbs 
Of Ore, with fibres become one with him, a living chain 

170 Sustained by the Demon's life. Despair, terror, and woe and rage 
Enwrap the parents in cold clouds as they bend howling o'er 
The terrible boy, till fainting by his side, the parents fell. 

Not long they lay, Urthona's spectre found herbs of the pit. 
Kubbing their temples he revived them. All their lamentations 
no x write not here, but all their after life was lamentation. 

When satiated with grief they returned back to Golgonooza, 
Enitharmon on the road of Dranthon felt the inmost gate 
Of her bright heart burst open and again close with a deadly pain. 
Within her heart Vala began to re-animate in bursting sobs, 

180 And when this gate was open she beheld that dreary deep 
Where bright Ahania wept. She also saw the infernal roots 
Of the chain of jealousy and felt rendings of howling Ore 
Rending the caverns like a mighty wind pent in the earth, 
Though wide apart as furthest north is from the furthest south. 

185 Urizen trembled where he lay to hear the howling terror. 

The rocks shook, the eternal bars tugged to and fro were rifted. 

Outstretched upon the stones of ice the ruins of his throne 

Urizen shuddering heard, his trembling limbs shook the strong caves. 

The woes of Urizen shut up in the deep dens of Urthona. 

190 Ah ! how shall Urizen the king submit to this dark mansion P 

Ah ! how is this ? Once on the heights I stretched my throne sublime. 



NIGHT V. 55 

The mountains, once of silver, where the sons of wisdom dwelt, 
And on whose tops the virgins sang, are rocks of desolation. 

My fountains, once the haunt of swans, now breed the scaly tortoise, 
195 The houses of my harpers are become a haunt of crows, 
The gardens of wisdom are become a field of horrid graves, 
And on the bones I drop my tears and water them in vain. 

Once how I from my palace walked in gardens of delight, 
The sons of wisdom stood around, the harpers came with harps, 
200 Nine virgins clothed in light made songs to their immortal voices, 
And at my banquet of new wine my head was crowned with joy. 

Then in my ivory palaces I slumbered in the noon 
And walked in the silent night among sweet-smelling flowers 
Till on my silver bed I slept and sweet dreams hovered round, 
206 But now my land is darkened and my wise men are departed. 

My songs are turned into cries of lamentation 
Heard on my mountains, and deep sighs under my palace roofs, 
Because the steeds of Urizen, once swifter than the light, 
Were kept back from my lord and from his chariot of mercies. 

210 Oh, did I keep the horses of the day in silver pastures ? 
Oh, I refused the Lord of Day the horses of his Prince ! 
Oh, did I close my treasuries with roofs of solid stone 
And darkened all my palace walls with envying and hate ? 

Oh, fool ! to think that I could hide from his all-piercing eye 
216 The gold and silver and costly stones, his holy workmanship ! 
Oh, fool ! Could I forget the light that filled my bright spheres 
Was a reflection of his face who called me from the deep. 

I well remember, for I heard the mild and holy voice 
Saying, Light spring up and shine, and lo, I sprang up from the deep. 
220 He gave to me a silver sceptre, crowned with a golden crown, 
And said, Go forth and guide my son who wanders on the ocean. 



56 NIGHT V. 

I went not forth, I hid myself on black clouds of my wrath, 
I called the stars around my feet in the night of council dark, 
The stars threw down their spears of light and fled naked away. 
225 We fell. I seized thee, dark Urthona, in my left hand falling. 

I seized thee, beauteous Luvah ; thou art faded like a flower 

And like a lily thy wife Vala, withered by the winds. 

When thon didst bear the golden cup at the immortal tables 

Thy children smote their fiery wings, crowned with the gold of heaven. 

230 Thy pure feet stept on steps divine, too pure for other feet, 

And thy fair locks shadowed thine eyes from this divine effulgence, 
And thou didst keep with strong Urthona the living gates of heaven, 
But now thou art bowed down with him, even to the gates of hell. 

Because thou gavest Urizen the wine of the Almighty 
235 For steeds that they might run in the golden chariot of pride 
I gave to thee the steeds of light, I poured the stolen wine, 
And drunken with the immortal draught fell from my throne sublime. 

I will arise, explore these dens, and find that deep pulsation 
That shakes my cavern with strong shudders. This may be the night 
240 Of prophecy, and Luvah hath burst his way from Enitharmon 

When thought is closed in caverns, love shows roots in deepest hell. 



END OP THE FIFTH NIGHT. 



So Urizen arose and leaning on his spear explored his dens. 
He threw his flight through the dark air to where a river flowed, 
And taking off his silver helmet filled it and drank ; 
But when, his thirst being sated, he assayed to gather more, 
6 Lo, three terrific women at the verge of the bright flood, 

Who would not suffer him to approach but drove him back with storm. 

Urizen knew them not, and thus addressed the spirits of darkness : 
Who art thou, eldest woman, sitting wrapped in these thy clouds ? 
What is that name written upon thy forehead ? What art thou ? 
10 And wherefore dost thou pour this water forth in sighs and care ? 
She answered not, but filled her urn and poured it forth abroad. 

Answerest thou not ? said Urizen. Then thou must answer me, 
Thou terrible woman clad in blue, whose strong attractive power 
Draws all into a fountain at the rock of thy attraction, 
15 With frowning brow thou sittest, mistress of these mighty waters. 
She answered not, but stretched her arms and threw her limbs abroad. 

Or wilt thou answer, youngest woman clad in shining green ? 
With labour and care thou dost divide the current into four. 
Queen of these dreadful rivers, speak, and let me hear thy voice. 

20 Then Urizen raised his spear, but they reared up a wall of rock. 

They gave a scream they knew their father : Urizen knew his 

daughters. 

They shrank into their channels dry, the strand beneath his feet, 
Hiding themselves in rocky forms from the eyes of Urizen. 
Then Urizen wept, and thus his lamentations poured forth: 



58 KIGHT VI. 

M Oh, horrible ! Oh, dreadful state ! Those whom I loved best, 
On whom I poured the branches of my light, adorning them 
With jewels and jealous ornament laboured with art divine, 
Vests of the radiant colours of heaven and crowns of golden fire, 
I gave sweet lilies to their breasts and roses to their hair, 

30 I taught them songs of sweet delight, I gave them tender voices 
Into the blue expanse, and I made, with laborious art, 
Sweet instruments of sound. In pride encompassing my knees 
They poured their radiance above all. The Daughters of Luvah envied 
At their exceeding brightness, and eternity sent gifts. 

85 Now will I pour my fury on them, and I will reverse 
The precious benediction. For their hues of loveliness 
I will give blackness ; frost for jewels ; ill form for ornament ; 
For crowns, wreathed serpents ; for sweet smell, corruptibility ; 
For voices of delight, hoarse croaking, inarticulate ; 

40 For laboured flattery, care and sweet instruction. I will give 
Chains of dark ignorance and cords of twisted self-conceit 
And whips of stern repentance, and the food of obstinacy, 
That they may curse Tharmas, their god, and Los, his adopted son ; 
That they may curse and worship the dark demon of destruction ; 

45 That they may worship terrors and obey the violent. 

Go forth, sons of my curse. Go forth, daughters of my abhorrence. 

Then Tharmas heard the deadly scream across his watery world, 
And Urizen's loud-sounding voice lamenting on the wind, 
And he came riding in his fury. Frozen were his waves, 
60 Silent in ridges he beheld them stand round Urizen, 
A dreary waste of solid waters. For the king of light 
Darkened his brows with his cold helmet, and his gloomy spear 
Darkened before him. Silent on the ridgy waves he took 
His gloomy way. Before him Tharmas fled, and flying fought, 

55 Crying : What and who art thou, cold demon P Art thou Urizen ? 
Art thou, like me, risen again from death ? or art thou deathless ? 
If thou art he, my desperate purpose hear, and give me death, 






KtGHT Vt. 59 

For death to me is better far than life, death, my desire, 
That I in vain by various paths have sought, but still I live. 

60 The body of man is given to me. I seek in vain to destroy, 
For still it surges forth in fish and monsters of the deeps, 
And in these monstrous forms I live in an Eternal woe, 
And thou, oh Urizen, art fallen, never to be delivered. 
Withhold thy light from me for ever, and I will withhold 

65 From thee thy food, so shall we cease to be, and all our sorrows 
End, and the Eternal Man no more renew beneath our power. 
If thou refusest, in eternal fight thy beams in vain 
Shall pursue Tharmas, and in vain shall crave for food. I will 
Pour down my flight through dark immensity Eternal, falling. 

? Thou shalt pursue me, but in vain, till starved upon the void 

Thou hangest, a dried skin, shrunk up, weak, wailing in the wind. 

So Tharmas spoke, but Urizen replied not, on his way 

He took, high sounding over hills and deserts, floods and chasms. 

Infinite was his labour, without end his travel. He strove 

75 In vain, for hideous monsters of the deep annoyed him sore, 

Scaled and finned with iron and brass, devoured the path before him 
Incessant with the conflict. On he bent his weary steps, 
Making a path toward the dark world of Urthona. He rose 
With pain upon the weary mountains, and with pain went down 

80 And saw their grizzly fears, and his eyes sickened at the sight, 

The howlings, gnashings, groanings, shriekings, shudderings, sobbings, 

burstings, 

Mingled together, to create a world for Los. In delight 
Los brooded on the darkness, nor saw Urizen's globe of fire 
Lighting his dismal journey through the pathless world of death, 

85 Writing in bitter tears and groans in books of iron and brass 
The enormous wonders of the Abysses, once his brightest joy. 

For Urizen saw the terrors of the Abyss wandering among 
The ruined spirits once his children, and the children of Luvah 
Scared at the souud of their sigh that seemed to shake immensity. 



60 



Niont VI. 



N 



N 



100 



105 



110 



115 



128 



They wander moping, in their heart a sun and weary moon, 

An universe of fiery constellations in their brain, 

An earth of wintry woe beneath their feet, and round their loins 

Waters or winds, or clouds, lightnings and pestilential plagues 

Beyond the bounds of their own self their senses cannot reach. 

As the tree knoweth not what is outside its leaves and bark, 

And yet it drinks the summer joy and fears the winter sorrow, 

So in the regions of the grave none knows his dark compeer 

Though he partakes of his dire woes, though he returns the pang, 

The throb, the dolor, the convulsion, in soul-sickening woes. 

The horrid shapes and sights of torment in burning dungeons and 

Fetters of red-hot iron, some with serpent crowns and some 

With monsters girding round their bosoms. Some in sulphur beds, 

On racks and wheels. He beheld women march in burning wastes 

Of sand in bands of hundreds, fifties, thousands, stricken with 

Lightnings which blazed after on their shoulders in their march, 

Successive volleys, with loud thunder. Swift flew the king of light 

Over the burning deserts. Then the deserts passed in clouds 

Of smoke, with myriads moping in the stifling vapours. Swift 

Still flew the king, though flagged his powers, labouring, till over rocks 

And mountains weary wandered he where multitudes were shut 

Up in the solid mountains and in rocks their torment heaved. 

Then came he among fiery cities, castles of fiery steel, 

There beheld forms of Tigers, Lions, dishumanized men, 

Many in serpents and in worms stretched out enormous length 

Over the solid mould, and slimy tracks obstruct his way 

Drawn out from deep to deep. Woven and ribbed 

And scaled monsters armed in iron shell, or shell of brass 

Or gold, a glittering torment hissing in eternal pain, 

Columns of fire, or of water, sometimes stretched in height, 

Sometimes in length, sometimes englobing, wandering in vain for ease 

His voice to them was inarticulate thunder, for their ears 

Were dull and heavy and their eyes and nostrils closed up. 

Oft he stood by a howling victim, questioning in words 

Soothing or furious. No one answered, everyone wrapped up 



NIGHT VI. 61 

125 In his own sorrow howled regardless of his voice, nor words 

Or sweet response could he obtain though oft assayed with tears. 
Oft would he stand and question a fierce scorpion glowing with gold 
In vain-, the terror heard not. Then a lion he would seize 
By the fierce mane, staying his howling course ; in vain the voice 

130 Of Urizen, in vain the eloquent tongue. Rock, mountain, cloud 
Were now not vocal as in climes of happy eternity. 
Where the lamb replies to the infant's voice and the lion to the wail 

of ewes, 

Giving them sweet instructions, when the cloud, or furrow'd field 
Talk with the husbandman and shepherd. But these attacked him sore, 

135 Seizing upon his feet, rending the sinews, that in caves 

He had to revive his obstructed power with rest and oblivion. 

When he had passed the Southern terrors he approached the East, 
Void, pathless, beaten with eternal sleet, and eternal hail and rain. 
No form was there, no living thing, and yet his way lay through 

140 Tbi s dismal world. He stood awhile and looked back over his 
Terrific voyages hills and dales of torment and despair 
Sighing, and weeping a fresh tear. Then turning round he threw 
Himself into the dismal void. Falling he fell and fell, 
Whirling in unresistible revolutions down and down 

145 In the horrid bottomless vacuity, falling, falling, 

Into the Eastern vacuity, the empty world of Luvah. 

The Ever-pitying One who seeth all things, saw his fall 

And in the dark vacuity created a bosom of clay. 

When wearied dead he fell, his limbs reposed in the bosom of slime. 
150 As the seed falls from the sower's hand so Urizen fell, and death 

Shut up his powers in oblivion. Then as the seed shoots forth 

In pain and sorrow, so the slimy bed his limbs renewed. 

At first an infant- weakness period passed. He gathered strength, 

But still in solitude he sat. Then rising threw his flight 
155 Onward, though falling, through the waste of night ending in death 

And in another resurrection to sorrow and weary travail. 

But still his books he bore in his strong hands, and his iron pen. 



62 NIGHT VI. 

For when he died they lay beside his grave, and when he rose 

He seized them with a gloomy smile, for wrapped in his death-clothes 

180 He hid them when he slept in death. When he revived the clothes 
Were rolled by the winds ; the clothes remained still unconsumed 
Still to be written and interleaved with brass and iron and gold, 
Time after time, for such a journey none but iron pens 
Can write, and adamantine leaves receive, nor can who goes 

IM The journey obstinate refuse to write, time after time. 

Endless had been his travail, but the Hand Divine him led 
For infinite the distance and obscured by combustion dire. 
By rocky masses flourishing in the abyss revolving erratic, 
Bound lakes of fire in this dark deep, the ruins of Urizen's world. 

!70 Oft would he sit in a dark rift and .regulate his books 
Or sleep such sleep as spirits eternal wearied in the dark 
Tearful and sorrowful state, then arise, look out and ponder 
His dismal voyage, eyeing the next sphere though far remote, 
Then darting into the abyss of night his venturous limbs 

tf* Through lightnings, thunders, earthquakes and confusion, fires and 

floods, 

Stemming his downward fate, labouring up against futurity. 
Creating many a vortex, many a science in the deep, 
And thence throwing his venturous limbs into the vast unknown. 
Swift, swift from chaos to chaos, from void to void a road immense. 

180 For when he came to where a vortex ceased to operate 

Nor down nor up remained. Then if he turned and looked back 
From whence he came, 'twas upward all, and if he turned and viewed 
The unpassed void upward was still his mighty wandering. 
The midst between an equilibrium grey of air serene, 

185 Where he might live in peace and where his life might meet repose. 

But Urizen said, Can I not leave this world of cumbrous wheels 
Circle over circle, nor on high attain a void 
Where self-sustaining I may view all things beneath my feet 
Or sinking through these elemental wonders, swift to fall, 



NIGHT VI. 63 

190 I thought perhaps to find an end, a world beneath of voidness, 
Whence I might travel round the outside of this dark confusion. 
When I bend downward, bending my head down into the deep, 
'Tis upward all which way soever I my course begin, 
But when a vortex formed on high with labour, sorrow and care, 

195 And weariness begins on all my limbs, then sleep revives 

My wearied spirits. Waking then 'tis downward all which way 
Soever I my spirits turn, no way I find of all. 
Oh, what a world is here, and how unlike those climes of bliss 
Where my sons gather round my knees ! Oh, thou poor ruined world, 

200 Thou horrible ruin ! Once, like me, thou wast all glorious, 
And now, like me, partaking desolate thy master's lot. 
Art thou, oh ruin, the once glorious heaven on these thy rocks 
Where joy sang on the trees and pleasure sported in the rivers, 
And laughter sat beneath the oaks, and innocence sported round, 

205 Upon the green plains, and sweet friendship met in palaces, 
And books and instruments of song and pictures of delight ? 
Where are they ? Whelmed beneath these ruins, in horrible destruction. 
And if, eternal-falling, .. repose on the dark bosom 
Of winds and waters, or thence fall into the void where air 
Is not, downfalling through immensity ever and ever, 
How my powers weakened every revolution, till a death 
Shuts up my powers ; then in womb of darkness as a seed 
I dwell in dim oblivion. Over me, the enormous worlds 
Reorganize in shooting forth, in bones and flesh and blood. 

215 I am regenerate, to fall, or rise, at will, or remain 
A labourer, a dire discontent, a living awe 

Wandering in vain. Here will I fix my foot and here re-build. 
These mountains of brass promise riches in their deepest bosom. 

So saying he began to form of gold, silver and iron 

And brass, vast instruments to measure out the immense and fix 

The whole into another world better, and made to obey 

His will, where none should dare oppose his will, himself being king. 

Of all, and all futurity he bound in his vast chain 



64 NIGHT VI. 

And the sciences were fixed and the vortexes began to work 

W* On all the sons of men, and every human soul terrified 

At the living wheels of heaven shrunk inward, withering away. 
Gaining a new dominion over all his sons and daughters, 
And over the sons and daughters of Luvah in the horrible abyss. 
For Urizen made over them a selfish lamentation 

230 Till a white woof his cold limbs covered o'er from head to feet, 
Hair white as snow now covered him in flakey locks terrific, 
Overspreading his limbs. In pride he wandered weeping on, 
Clothed in an aged venerableness, obstinately resolved, 
Travelling through darkness, and wherever he travelled a dire web 

235 Followed behind him, as the web of a spider dusky and cold, 
Shivering across the vortexes, drawn from his mantle of years, 
A living mantle joined to his life and growing from his soul, 
And the web of Urizen stretched, direful, shivering, as clouds 
And uttering such woes, and bursting with such thunderings. 

240 The eyelids expansive as morning and the ears 

As a golden ascent winding round to the heaven of heavens 
Within the dark horror of the abyss, lions or tigers, or scorpions. 
For everyone opened into Eternity at will, 
But they refused, because their outstretched forms were in the abyss 

246 And the wing-like tent of the universe, beautiful, surrounding all, 
Or drawn up or let down again at will of the immortal man, 
Vibrated in such anguish as the eyelids quivered, weak, 
That weaker their expansive orbs began again to shrink, 
Pangs smote through all the brain and then a universal shriek. 

260 Torment on torment through the abysses ran, rending the web. 

Thus Urizen in sorrows wandered many a weary way 

Warring with monsters of the deep in hideous pilgrimage 

Till his bright hair scattered in snows, his skin barked o'er with 

wrinkles, 

Four caverns rolling downwards, their foundations thrusting forth 
258 The metal, rock, and stone in painful throes of vegetation. 
The cave of Ore stood in the south, a furnace of dire flames, 



NIGHT VI. 65 

Quenchless, unceasing. In the west the cave of Urizen ; 

For Urizen fell, as midday sun falls down, into the west. 
North stood Urthona's steadfast throne, a world of solid dark, 

260 Obstruction stifling, shut up, rooted in dumb despair. 

The East was void. But Tharmas rolled his waves in ceaseless eddies 
All through the caverns of fire, air, and earth, seeking in vain 
For Enion's limbs, nought finding but black sea and sickening slime 
Flying away from Urizen that he might not give him food, 

265 Above, beneath, on all sides round, in the deep of immensity, 

That he might starve the sons and daughters of Urizen on the wind, 

Making between horrible chasms with the vast unknown. 

All these around the world of Los cast forth their monstrous births. 

But in Eternal times the seat of Urizen in the south, 
270 Urthona in the north, Luvah in east, Tharmas in west. 

And now he came into the abhorred world of dark Urthona, 

By Providence Divine conducted, not bent by his own will 

Lest Death Eternal be the result, for the will cannot be violated, 

Into the doleful vales where no tree grew or ruin flowed, 

275 No man nor beast nor creeping thing, nor sun nor cloud nor star, 
Till with his globe of fire immense, held in his venturous hand, 
He bore on through the affrighted vales, ascending and descending, 
And wearied in his cumbrous flight he ventured o'er dark rifts, 
Or down dark precipices, or with pain and labour climbed, 

280 Till from Urthona's peaked rock he saw the world of Los, 
And heard the howling of red Ore distincter and distincter. 

Redoubling his immortal effort, through the narrow vales 
With difficulty down descending, guided by his ear 
And by his globe of fire, he went down through Urthona's vale 
285 Between the enormous iron walls built by the Spectre, dark, 

Dark grew his globe reddening with mists, and full before his path, 
Standing across the narrow vale the shadow of Urthona 
A spectre vast appeared, whose legs and feet, with iron scaled, 

5 



66 NIGHT VI. 

Stamped the hard rocks expectant of the unknown wanderer 
290 Whom he had seen wandering his nether world when distant far, 
And watched his swift approach. Collected, dark, the spectre stood. 
Beside him Tharmas stayed his flight and stood with stern de6ance, 
Communing with the spectre who rejoiced along the vale. 
Around his loins a girdle glowed with many coloured fires, 
295 And in his hand a knotted club whose knots like mountains frowned, 
Desert among the stars there withering with its ridges cold. 
Black scales of iron arm the dread image. Iron spikes instead 
Of hair shoot from his orbed skull ; the while his glowing eyes 
Burned like two furnaces. He called with voice of thunder loud. 

300 Four winged heralds mount the furious blast and blow their trumps 
Gold, silver, brass, and iron clangours, clamouring, rend the shore. 
Like white clouds rising from the vales, his armies fifty -two 
Around the spectre, glowing, from Urthona's four cliffs rise. 
Four sons of Urizen the squadrons of Urthona led, in arms 

305 Of gold and silver, brass and iron : he knew his mighty sons. 

Then Urizen arose upon the wind, back many a mile, 

Returning into his dire web, scattering fleecy snows 

As he ascended howling. Loud the net vibrated strong. 

From heaven to heaven and globe to globe its vast eccentric paths, 

310 Compulsive rolled the comets at his dread command their way, 
Falling with wheel impetuous down among Urthona's vales 
And round red Ore, to Urizen returning, gorged with blood. 
Slow roll the massy globes at his command, and slow o'erwheel, 
The dismal squadrons of Urthona weaving the dire web 

315 In this progression, and preparing Urthona's path before him. 



RND OF THE SIXTH NIGHT. 



|%jrt % 



Then Urizen arose. The spectre fled, and Tharmas fled ; 

The darkening spectre of Urthona hid beneath a rock. 

Tharmas threw his impetuous flight through the deeps of immensity 

Revolving round in whirlpools fierce all round the caverned worlds. 

6 But Urizen went silent, down to caves of Ore, and saw 
A caverned universe of fire. The horses of Urizen 
Here bound to fiery mangers, furious dash their golden hoofs, 
Striking fierce sparkles from their golden fetters. Fierce his lions 
Howl in the burning dens ; his tigers roam on redounding smoke 

10 In forests of affliction. The adamantine scales of justice 
Consuming in the raging lamps of mercy poured in rivers. 
The holy oil rages through all the caverned rocks. Fierce flames 
Dance on the rivers and the rocks, howling and drunk with fury. 
The plough of ages and the golden harrow wade through fields 

15 Of gory blood. The immortal seed is nourished for the slaughter. 
The bulls of Luvah, breathing fire, bellow on burning pastures 
Round howling Ore, whose awful limbs cast forth red smoke and fire, 
That Urizen approached not near but took his seat on a rock 
And ranged his books around him, brooding envious over Ore. 

20 Howling and rending his dark caves the awful demon lay : 

Pulse after pulse beat on his fetters, pulse after pulse his spirit 
Dashed and dashed higher and higher to the shrine of Enitharmon, 
As when the thunder folds himself in robe of thickest clouds, 
The watery nations couch and hide in the profoundest deeps, 

25 Then bursting from his head, with dreadful face and flaming hair, 
His swift-winged daughters sweep across the vast blue ocean. 



68 



NTGHT VII. 



to 



4.-, 



H 



Los felt the envy in his limbs, like to a blighted tree ; 

For Urizen fixed in envy sat brooding and covered with snow, 

His book of iron on his knees. He traced the dreadful letters 

While his snows fell and his storms beat to cool the flames of Ore, 

Age after age, till underneath his heel a deadly root 

Struck through the rock, the root of Mystery, accursed, shooting up 

Branches into the heaven of Los, then pipe-formed bending down 

Take root again where'er they touch, and, again branching forth 

In intricate labyrinths overspreading many a grizzly deep. 

Amazed started Urizen, finding him compassed round 
And high roofed over with the trees. He arose, but now the stems 
Stood so thick, he with difficulty and with great pain brought 
The books out of the dismal shade, all but the book of iron. 

Again he took his seat, again he ranged his books around 
On a rock of iron frowning over the foaming fires of Ore. 
And Urizen hung over Ore and viewed his terrible wrath, 
Sitting upon an iron crag. At length his words broke forth : 

Image of dread, whence art thou ? Whence is thy most woeful place ? 

Whence these fierce fires, but from thyself ? No other living thing 

In all the chasm I behold. No other living thing 

Dare my most terrible wrath abide, bound here to waste in pain. 

Thy vital substance in these fires that issue new and new 

Around thee. Sometimes like a flood, and sometimes like a rock 

Of living pangs, thy horrible bed glowing with ceaseless fires 

Beneath thee and around. Above, a shower of fire now beats 

Moulded to globes and arrowed wedges, rending thy bleeding limbs. 

And now a whirling pillar of burning sand to overwhelm thee, 

Steeping thy wounds in salts infernal and in bitter anguish. 

And now a rock moves on the surface of this lake of fire 

To bear thee down beneath the waves in stifling despair. 

Pity for thee moved me to break my dark and long repose, 

And to reveal myself before thee in a form of wisdom. 

Tet thou dost laugh at all these tortures, and this horrible place, 



NiGfiT VII. 69 

60 Yet throwest these fires abroad, that back return upon thee now, 
While thou reposest, throwing rage on rage, feeding thyself 
With visions of sweet bliss far other than this burning clime. 
Sure thou art bathed in rivers of delight on verdant fields, 
Walking in joy in bright expanses, sleeping on bright clouds, 

65 With visions of delight so lovely that they urge thy rage 

Tenfold with fierce desire to rend thy chains and howl in fury, 

And dire oblivion of all woe and desperate repose, 

Or is thy joy founded on torment that others bear for thee ? 

Ore answered : Curse thy hoary brows, what dost thou in this deep ? 

70 Thy pity I contemn. Go forth, scatter thy snows elsewhere. 

I rage in the deep, my feet and hands are nailed to the burning rock, 
Yet my fierce fires are better than thy snows. Shuddering thou sitt'st. 
Thou art not chained. Why should'st thou sit, cold, grovelling demon 

of woe, 
In torture of dire coldness ? Now a lake of water deep 

76 Sweeps over thee, freezing to solid. Still thou sitt'st, closed up 
In that transparent rock as if in joy of thy bright prison, 
Till, overburdened with its weight, down through immensity, 
With a crash breaking clear across, the horrid mass comes down, 
Thundering, and hail and frozen iron hailed from the element, 

80 Rend thy white hair. Yet thou dost, fixed, obdurate, brooding, sit 
Writing thy books. Anon a cloud, filled with a waste of snow, 
Covers thee. Obdurate still, resolved still, and writing still, 
Though rocks roll o'er thee, though floods pour, though winds black 

as the sea 
Cut thee in gashes, though the blood pour down around thy ancles, 

86 Freezing thy feet to the hard rock. Still thy pen obdurate 
Traces the wonders of Futurity in horrible fear of the future. 
I rage here furious in the deep : my feet and hands are nailed 
To the hard rock, or thou should'st feel my enmity and hate 
In all diseases falling on thy grey accursed front. 

90 Urizen answered : Read my books, explore my constellations, 



?0 NIGHT Vtt. 

Enquire of my sons and they shall teach thee how to war. 
Enquire of my daughters, who, accursed in the dark deeps, 
Knead bread of sorrow by my stern command, for I am god 
Of all this ruin. Rise, oh daughters, at my stern command. 

96 Bending the rocks, Eleth and Uvith rose, and Ona rose, 
Terrific with their iron vessels, driving them across 
In the dim air. They locked the book of iron, and placed above 
On clouds of death, and sang their songs, kneading the bread of Ore. 

Ore listened to the song, compelled, hungering on the cold wind 
100 That s wagged heavy with the accursed dough. The hoar frost raged 
Through Ona's sieve. The torrent rain poured from the iron pail 
Of Eleth, and the icy hands of Uvith kneaded bread. 

The heavens bow with terror underneath these iron hands, 
Singing at their dire work the words of Urizen's book of iron, 
106 While the enormous scrolls rolled dreadful in the heavens above ; 
And still the burden of their song in tears was poured forth. 
The bread is kneaded, let us rest, oh cruel father of children ! 

But Urizen remitted not their labours on his rock, 
And Urizen read on his book of brass in sounding tones : 
110 Listen, oh daughters, to my voice ; listen to the words of wisdom. 
To bring the shadow of Enitharmon beneath our wondrous tree, 
That Los evaporate away like smoke, and be no more. 
Draw Enitharmon down unto the spectre of Urthona, 
And let him have dominion over Los, the terrible shade. 

116 Compel the poor to live upon a crust with soft mild arts, 
So shall you govern over all. Let duty tune your tongue, 
And be your hearts far harder than the nether milestone is. 
Smile when they frown, frown when they smile, and when a man 

looks pale 
With labour and abstinence, then say healthy and glad he seems, 

120 And when his children sicken let them die. There are enough 






NIGHT VII. 71 

Born, even too many, and our earth will soon be overrun 
Without these arts. If you would make the poor with temper live, 
With pomp give every crust of bread you give ; by gracious cunning 
Magnify gifts ; reduce the man to want, then give with pomp. 
125 Say, if you hear him sigh, he smiles ; if pale, say he is ruddy. 

Preach temperance : say that he is overgorged, and drowns his wit 
In strong drink, though you know that bread and water must be all 
He can afford. Flatter his wife, pity his children, till 
We can reduce all to our will, like spaniels taught with art. 

130 Lo ! how the heart and brain are formed in the breeding womb 
Of Enitharmon. How it breeds with life and forms the bones, 
The little heart, the liver, the red blood in labyrinths, 
By gratified desire, devouring appetite, she fills 
Los with ambitious fury that his race shall all devour. 

135 Then Ore cried : Curse thy cold hypocrisy ! Around thy tree 

In scales that shine with gold and rubies, thou beginn'st to weaken 
My divided spirit. Like a worm I rise in peace, unbound 
From wrath. Now when I rage my fetters bind me more. 
Oh, torment ! oh, torment ! A worm compelled ! Am I a worm ? 

140 Is it in strong deceit that man is born ? In strong deceit 
Thou dost restrain my fury that the worm may bind the tree. 
Avaunt, cold hypocrite ! Thou could'st not use me thus unchained. 
The Man shall rage, bound with this chain, the worm in silence creep. 
Thou wilt not cease from rage. Grey demon, silence all thy storms, 

145 Give me example of thy mildness. King of furious hail, 

Art thou the cold, attractive power that holds me in this chain ? 
I well remember how I stole thy light and it became fire, 
Consuming. Wow thou knowest me, Urizen, Prince of Light, 
And I know thee. Is this the triumph ? This the golden state 

150 That lies beyond the bounds of science on the grey obscure ? 

Terrified Urizen heard Ore, now certain that he was Luvah. 
And creeping Ore began to organize a serpent-body, 



72 NIOHT VII. 

Despising Urizen's light and turning it to flaming fire, 
Receiving as a poisoned cup receives the heavenly wine, 
1M A n d turning affliction into fury, thought into abstraction, 
A self-consuming, dark devourer, raging into the heavens. 

Urizen, envying, brooding, sat and saw the secret terror 
Flame high in pride and laugh to scorn the source of his deceit, 
Nor knew the source of his own, but thought himself the author sole 

160 Of all his wandering experiments on the horrible abyss. 

He knew that weakness stretches out in length and breadth, and knew 
That wisdom reaches high and deep ; and therefore he made Ore 
In serpent form compelled to stretch out and up the mysterious tree. 
He suffered him to climb that he might draw all human forms 

185 Unto submission to his will, nor knew the dread result. 

Los sat in showers of Urizen watching cold Enitharmon. 
His broodings rush down to his feet, producing eggs that hatching 
Burst forth upon the winds above the tree of Mystery. 
Enitharmon lay on his knees. Urizen traced his verses. 
170 In the dark deep the dark tree grew. Her shadow was drawn down, 
Down to the roots ; it wept o'er Ore, the shadow of Enitharmon. 

Los saw her stretched, the image of death, upon his withered valleys ; 
Her shadow went forth and returned. Now she was pale as snow, 
When the mountains and hills are covered, and the paths of men 
shut up. 

175 But when her spirit returned, as ruddy as morning when 
The ripe fruit blushes into joy in heaven's eternal halls, 
Sorrow shot through him from his feet and shot up to his head, 
Like a cold night that nips the roots and scatters all the leaves. 
Silent he stood o'er Enitharmon, watching her pale face. 

180 He spoke not, he was silent, till he felt the cold disease. 

Then Los mourned on the dismal wind in his jealous lamentation. 

Why cannot I enjoy thy beauty, lovely Enitharmon ? 

When I return from clouds of grief in the wandering elements, 



vii. 73 

When thou in thrilling joy, in beaming summer loveliness, 

185 Delectable reposest, ruddy in my absence, flaming with beauty, 
Cold, pale in sorrow at my approach, trembling at my terrific 
Forehead and eyes thy lips decay like roses in the spring. 
How art thou shrunk ! Thy grapes that burst in summer's ripe excess 
Shut up in little purple covering faintly bud and die. 

190 Thy olive-trees that poured down oil upon a thousand hills 

Sickly look forth and scarcely stretch their branches to the plain. 
Thy roses that expanded in the face of glowing morn 
Hid in a little silken veil scarce breathe and faintly shine. 
Thy lilies that gave light what time the morning looked forth 

193 Hid in the vales, faintly lament, and no one hears their voice. 
All things beside the woeful Los enjoy delights of beauty ! 
Once how I sang and called the beasts and birds to their delight, 
Nor knew that I alone, exempted from the joys of love, 
Must war with secret monsters of the animating worlds. 

200 Oh, that I had not seen the day ! Then should I be at rest ! 
Nor felt the strivings of desire, nor longings after life, 
For life is sweet to Los the wretched. To his winged woes 
Is given a craving cry : they sit at night on barren rocks, 
And whet their beaks and snuff the air, and watch the opening dawn, 

205 And shriek till at the smell of blood they stretch their bony wings, 
And cut the winds like arrows shot by troops of destiny. 

Thus Los lamented in the night, unheard by Enitharmon. 
Her shadow descended down the tree of mystery. 
The spectre saw the shadow shivering o'er his gloomy rocks 
210 Beneath the tree of mystery, which in the dismal abyss 
Began to blossom in fierce pain, shooting its writhing buds 
In throes of birth, and now, the blossoms falling, shining fruit 
Appeared, of many colours and of poisonous qualities. 
Of plagues, hidden in shining globes that grew on the living tree, 

215 The spectre of Urthona saw the shadow of Enitharmon 
Beneath the tree of Mystery among the leaves and fruit, 



74 NIGHT VII. 

Reddening the demon strong prepared the poison of sweet love, 
He turned from side to side in tears. Ho wept and he embraced 
The fleeting image, and in whispers mild woo'd the faint shade. 

180 Loveliest delight of men ; oh ! Enitharmon, shady, hiding 
In secret places where no eye can trace thy watery way, 
Have I found thee ? Have I found thee ? Tremblest thou in fear ? 
Because of Ore ? Because he rent his loud discordant way 
From thy sweet loins of bliss ? Red flow'd thy blood on that dread 
day, 

225 Pale grew thy face. Around the thundering horror lightnings played 
Over thee, and the terrible Ore, and rent his discordant way, 
But the next joy of thine shall be in sweet delusion, 
Its birth in faintings and in sleep, delusions sweet of Vala. 

The shadow of Enitharmon answered, Art thou, terrible shade, 

880 Set over this sweet boy of mine to guard him lest he rend 
His mother to the winds of heaven, intoxicated with fruit 
Of this delightful tree? Behold, I cannot flee away 
From thy embrace, else be assured so horrible a form 
Should never in my arms repose. Now listen, I will tell 

235 The secrets of Eternity which ne'er before unlocked 

My golden lips, nor took the bar from Enitharmon's breast; 
Among the flowers of Beulah walked th' Eternal Man, and saw 
Vala, the lily of the desert. Melting in high noon 
Upon her bosom in sweet bliss he fainted. Wonder seized 

240 All heaven, for they saw him dark. They built a golden wall 
Round Beulah. There he revelled in delight among the flowers. 
Vala was pregnant and brought forth Urizen, Prince of Light, 
First-born of generation. Then a wonder to the eyes 
Of the now fallen man, a double form Vala appeared, a male 

245 And female shuddering. Pale at sight the fallen man recoiled, 
And calling the Enormity, Luvah and Vala, turned 
Down vales to find his way back into heaven, but found none. 
For his frail eyes were faded, and his ears heavy and dull. 



NIGHT vii. 75 

Urizen grew up in the plains of Beulah. Many sons 
860 And many daughters flourished round the holy tent of man 
Till he forgot Eternity, delighted in his sweet joy, 
Among his family, his flocks and herds, and tents and fields. 

But Luvah close conferred with Urizen in darksome night 
To bind the father and enslave the brethren. Nought he knew 

255 Of sweet Eternity. The blood flow'd round the holy tent and river ; 
All Beulah from its hinges fell, uttering its final groan 
In dark confusion. Meantime Los was born and Enitharmon, 
But how, I know not. Then forgetfulness quite wrapped me up 
A period, nor do I more remember, till I stood 

260 Beside Los in the cave, enslaved to vegetative forms 
According to the will of Luvah, who assumed the place 
Of the Eternal Man and smote him. But thou, Spectre dark, 
Must find a way to punish Vala in the fiery south, 
To bring her down subjected to the rage of my fierce boy. 

265 The Spectre said, Thou lovely vision, this delightful tree 
Is given us for a shelter from the storms of void and solid, 
Till once again the morn of ages shall renew on us, 
To re-unite in those mild fields of happy Eternity, 
Where thou and I in undivided essence walked abroad 

270 Imbodied, thou my garden of delight, and I the spirit 
Mutual dwelt in one another, mutual joy revolving. 
Eternal days with Tharmas mild and Luvah sweet, melodious, 
Upon our waters ; thou rememberest, Sisters, I will tell 
What thou forgetest. They in us and we in them have lived, 

275 Drinking the joys of Universal Mankind. One dread morn 
Listen, oh Vision of Delight, one morn of gory blood 
The Manhood was divided. Gentle passions making way 
Through th' infinite labyrinth of the heart and nostrils issuing, 
In odorous stupefaction, stood before the eyes of Man 

880 A female bright. I stood beside my anvil dark, a mass 



76 KlflHT Vll. 

Of iron glow'd bright prepared for spado aiid plough-share, sudden 

down 

I sunk with cries of blood, issuing downward in the veins 
Which now my rivers were become, rolling in tube-like forms 
Shut up within themselves descending down. I sunk along 

885 The gory tide even to the place of seed. Divided there 
I was in darkness and oblivion. Thou an infant woe, 
And I an infant terror in the womb of Enion. 
My masculine spirit scorning the frail body issued forth 
From Enion's brain, in this deformed form, leaving thee there 

290 Till times passed over thee, my spirit still returning hovered 
And formed a male, to be a counterpart to thee, oh love, 
Darkened and lost ! In due time issuing forth from Enion's womb 
Thou and that demon Los were born. Ah, jealousy and woe ! 
Ah, poor divided dark Urthona, now a Spectre wandering, 

885 In deeps of Los, the slave of that creation I created. 

I labour night and day for Los, but listen thou my vision, 
I view futurity with thee. I will bring down soft Vala 
To the embraces of this terror, and I will destroy 
The body I created ; then shall we unite in bliss. 

300 For till these terrors planted round the gates of Eternal life 
Are driven away, annihilated, we cannot repass the gates. 
Thou knowest that the Spectre is in every man, insane, brutish, 
Brutish, deformed, that I am thus a ravening lust continually 
Craving, devouring ; but my eyes are upon thee, oh lovely 

305 Delusion, and I cannot crave except for thee : not so 

The Spectres of the dead : I am the Spectre of the living. 

Although filled with tears, the spirit of Enitharmon beheld 
And heard the Spectre. Bitterly she wept, embracing fervent 
Her once loved Lord, now but a shade, herself also a shade, 
310 Conferring times on times among the branches of that tree. 
Thus they conferred among th' intoxicating fumes of Mystery 
Till Enitharmon's shadow, pregnant in the deeps beneath, 
Brought forth a wonder horrible, while Enitharmon shrieked 



NIGHT VII. 77 

And trembled through the worlds above, and Los wept, terrified 
315 At the shrieks of Enitharmon and her tossings, nor perceived 
The cause of her dire anguish, for she lay the image of death, 
Moved by strong shudders till her shadow was delivered, then 
Raving ran through the upper elements in maddening fury. 

She burst the gates of Enitharmon's heart with direful crash, 
820 Nor could they e'er be closed again, the golden hinges were broke, 
And the gates broken in sunder, and their ornaments defaced 
Beneath the tree of Mystery, for the immortal shade 
Brought forth this wonder horrible. A cloud she grew and grew 
Till many of the dead burst through the bottoms of their tombs 
825 In male forms without female counterparts or emanations, 
Cruel and ravening with envy, hatred, and with war, 
In dreams of Ulro, dark, delusive, drawn by the lovely shade. 

The Spectre, terrified, gave her charge over the howling Ore, 
Men took the tree of Mystery cast in the world of Los. 
330 Its top boughs shoot a fibre beneath Enitharmon's couch, 
The double-rooted labyrinth soon waved around their heads. 

The Spectre entered Los's bosom. Every sigh and groan 
Of Enitharmon bore Urthona's Spectre on its wings, 
Obdurate Los felt pity; Enitharmon told the tale 
835 Of Urthona. Los embraced the Spectre as a brother first, 
Then as another self, astonished, humanizing in tears 
In self-abasement giving up his domineering lust. 

Thou never canst embrace sweet Enitharmon. Demon dread, 
Thou art united with thy Spectre, to consume by pains 
That mortal body, and by self-annihilation come 
Back to Eternal Life to be assured I am thy self, 
Though thus divided from thee and the slave of every passion 
Of thy fierce soul. Unbar the gates of memory : look on me 
as another^ but as thy real self, I am thy Spectre, 



78 



NIGHT VII. 



350 



336 



360 



305 



370 



375 



Though horrible and ghastly to thine eyes, buried beneath 
The ruins of the universe. Hear what, inspired, I speak ; 
If we unite in one another bitter worlds will be 
Opened within your heart and in your loins and wondrous brain 
Threefold, as in Eternity, and this fourth universe 
Will be renewed by the three, consumed in mental fires. 
Thou didst subdue me in old times by thy immortal power 
When I was ravening hungry, thirsting cruel, murder and lust, 
But if thou dost refuse another body will be prepared 
For me, and thou annihilate, vanish and be no more. 
For thou art but a form and organ of life, and of thyself 
Art nought, by Mercy and Love Divine continually created. 

Los answered, Spectre horrible, thy words astound my ear 
With irresistible conviction. I feel I am not of those 
Who, when convinced, persist, though furious, controllable 
By Reason's power. I already feel a world within 
Opening its gates, and in it all the real substances 
Of which these in the outer world are shadows which pass away. 
Come then into my bosom, in thy shadowy arms, with thee 
Bring lovely Enitharmon. I will quell my fury and teach 
Peace to the soul of dark revenge, and repentance to cruelty. 

So spoke Los, and embracing Enitharmon and the Spectre, 

Clouds would have folded round in love and extacy uniting, 

But Enitharmon trembling, fled and hid beneath Urizen's tree, 

But mingling together with his spectre, the Spectre of Urthona 

Wondering, beheld the centre opened. By Divine Mercy inspired, 

He in his bosom gave tasks to Los, enormous, to destroy 

That body he created, but in vain, though Los performed wonders of 

labour. . . . 

They builded Golgonooza, Los builded the pillars high, 
And domes terrific in the nether heavens, for beneath 
Was opened a new heaven, a new earth beneath within, 
Threefold within the brain, within the heart, within the loins 



NIGHT VII. 79 

/ 

A threefold atmosphere continuous from Urthona's world, 
But yet having a limit twofold named Satan and Adam, 
But Los stood on the limit of translucence weeping, trembling, 
sso Filled with doubts in self-accusation beheld the fruit 
Of Urizen's mysterious tree, for Enitharmon spake. 

When in the deeps beneath I gathered of this ruddy fruit, 
It was by that I knew that I had sinned, and I knew 
That, without ransom, I could not be saved from Eternal death, 
385 That life lives upon death, and by devouring appetite 

All things subsist on one another. Thenceforth in despair 
I spend my glowing times, but thou art strong, and mighty thou 
To bear this self-contrition. Take, then, eat thou also of 
The fruit, and give me proof of life eternal or I die. 

390 Then Los plucked the fruit and eat and sat down in despair, 
And must have surely given himself to death eternal, but 
Urthona's spectre ministering within him comforted, 
As medium between him and Enitharmon, but this union 
Was not to be effected without cares and sorrows and troubles, 

395 Six thousand years of self-denial and of bitter contrition. 

Urthona's Spectre, terrified, saw the spectres of the dead, 
Each male without a counterpart, without a concentering vision, 
The Spectre wept before Los, saying, Behold I am the cause 
That this dim state commences. I begin the dreadful state 

400 Of separation, and on my dark head the punishment 
Must fall unless a way be found to ransom and redeem. 
But I have this, my counterpart, given miraculous. 
These spectres have no counterparts, therefore they raven thus 
Without the food of life. Let us create them counterparts. 

405 The Spectre is Eternal Death, without a created body. 

Los trembling, answered : Now I feel the weight of stern repentance, 

Tremble not so, my Enitharmon, at the awful gates 

Of thy poor broken heart. I see thee like a shadow withering 



80 NIGHT VII. 

AR on the outside of existence. But behold, take comfort, 
410 Turn inwardly thine eyes, and there behold the Lamb of God 

Clothe'd in Luvah's robes of blood descending to redeem. 

Oh, Spectre of Urthona, take comfort ! Enitharmon, 

Could'st thou but cease from terror, and from trembling and affright, 

When I appear before thee in forgiveness of injuries, 
*W Why should'st thou remember to be afraid ? 

Often enough thy jealousy and terror convince. I have died in pain. 

Come hither ; patient be ; let us converse together, for 

I also tremble at myself and all my former life. 

Enitharmon answered : I behold the Lamb of God descending 
420 To meet the spectres of the dead. I therefore fear that he 

Will give us to Eternal death for punishment, for such 

Hideous offenders' last extinction is eternal pain. 

An ever-dying life of stifling and obstruction, shut 

Out of existence to be a sign, and terror to who see. 
425 Lest any in futurity should do as we in heaven, 

Such is our state, nor will the Son redeem ns, but destroy, 

So Enitharmon spoke trembling, and in torrents of tears 
Los sat in Golgonooza at the gate of Laban, where 
He had created porches where branched the mysterious tree. 
430 Where the spectrous dead wail ; sighing thus he spoke to Enitharmon. 

Lovely delight of men, Enitharmon, shady refuge from war, 
Thy bosom translucent is a soft repose for weeping souls 
Of piteous victims of battle, where they sleep, happy, obscure. 
They feed upon our life. We are their victims. Stern desire 

435 I feel to make embodied semblances in which the dead 
May live in our palaces and in our gardens of labour, 
Which now, opened within the centre, we behold spread round 
To form a world of sacrifice of brothers, sons, and daughters, 
To comfort Ore in his dire sufferings. Look, my fires afresh 

440 Before my face assembling with delight as in old times ! 

Enitharmon spread her beamy locks upon the wind, and said 






NIGHT VII. 81 

Oh ! wonder of Eternity, Los, my defence and guide, 

Thy works are all my joy and in thy fires my soul delights, 

If mild they burn in just proportion and in secret night 

445 And sik-nce. Build their day in shadow of soft clouds and dens. 
I can sigh forth on the winds of Golgonooza piteous forms 
That vanish again in my bosom ; but if thou, my Los, 
Wilt in sweet moderate fury fabricate these forms sublime, 
Such as the piteous spectres may assimilate them with, 

450 They shall be ransoms for our souls, that we through them may live. 

So Enitharmon spoke, and Los, his hands inspired, began 

To moderate his fires, studious, the loud roaring flames 

He vanquished with the strength of art, bending their iron points, 

And drawing them forth deflected on the winds of Golgonooza. 

455 From out the ranks of Urizen's war, and from the fiery lake 
Of Ore, bending down as the binder of the sheaves follows 
The reaper, embracing in both arms the furious raging flames, 
Los drew them forth out of the deeps, planting his right foot firm 
On the iron crag of Urizen, thence springing up aloft 

400 Into the heavens of Enitharmon in a mighty circle. 

And first he drew a line upon the walls of shining heaven, 
And Enitharmon tinctured it with beams of blushing love. 
It remained permanent, a lovely form, inspired, divine, human. 
Dividing into just proportion, Los unwearied laboured 
465 The immortal lines upon the heavens, till, with sighs of love, 

Sweet Enitharmon mild, entranced, breathed forth upon the wind 
The spectrous dead, weeping. The Spectre viewed the immortal work 
Of Los, assimilating to those forms Embodied. Lovely 
In youth and beauty, in the arms of Enitharmon mild. 

470 First Rintrah, and then Palamabron, drawn from ranks of war, 
In infant innocence reposed on Enitharmon's bosom. 
Ore was comforted in the deeps ; his soul revived in them ; 
As the elder brother is the father's image, so Ore became 

6 



82 NIGHT VII. 

As Los, a father to his brethren, and forged in the dark lake, 
475 Then bound with chains of jealousy and scales of iron and brass. 

Los loved them, and refused to sacrifice their infant limbs, 

And Enitharmon's smiles and tears prevailed o'er self-protection. 

They rather chose to meet Eternal Death than to destroy 

The offspring of their care and pity. Urthona's spectre was comforted, 

484 But Tharmas most rejoiced in hope of Enion's return, 
For he beheld new female forms borne forth upon the air, 
Who wore soft silken veils of covering in sweet raptured trance, 
Mortal, and not as Enitharmon, without a covering veil. 

First his immortal spirit drew Urizen's spectre away 

485 From out the ranks of war, separating him in sunder, 
Leaving his spectrous form, which could not so be drawn away. 
Then he divided Tiriel, the eldest of Urizen's sons. 

Urizen became Rintrah, Tiriel became Palamabron : 
Thus divided the power of every warrior. 
m Startled was Los he found his enemy Urizen now 

In his hands. Much he wondered that he felt love and not hate, 
His whole soul loved him. He as an infant him beheld, 
Lovely, from Enitharmon breathed. He trembled in himself. 

But in the deeps beneath the breasts of Mystery in night 
485 Where Urizen sat on his rock, behold, the shadow brooded. 
Urizen saw and tiiumphed, and he cried to his warriors : 
The Time of Prophecy is now revolved at last, and all 
The universal ornament is mine, and in my hand 
The ends of heaven. Like a garment I will fold them round, 
600 Consuming what must be consumed. In power and majesty 
I will walk forth through these wide fields of endless Eternity, 
A God and not a Man, a conqueror in triumphant glory, 
And all the sons of mortality shall bow down at my feet. 

First trades and commerce, ships and armed vessels he builded 

laborious 
1505 To swim the deep ; and on the land children are sold to trades 



NIGHT VII. 83 

Of dire necessity, still labouring day and night, till, all 
Their life extinct, they take the spectre form in dark despair, 
And slaves in myriads, in shiploads, burden the sounding deep. 

And IJrizen laid the first stone, and all his myriads 

510 Builded a temple in the image of the human heart. 

And in the inner part of the temple, wondrous workmanship, 
They formed the secret place, reviving all the altars of delight, 
That whomsoever entered into the temple might not be sold 
The hidden, wondrous allegories of the generations 

515 Of secret lust, when hid in chambers dark the mighty harlot 

Plays at disguise in whispered hymn and mumbling prayer. The 

Priests 

He ordained, Presbyters, and clothed in disguises bestial, 
Inspiring secrets. They bore lamps. Intoxicating fumes 
Roll round the temple. And they took the Sun that glowed o'er Los 

520 And with immense machines, down-rolling, the terrific orb 
Compelled. The sun, reddening, like a lion in his chains, 
Descended to the sound of instruments that drowned the noise 
Of the hoarse wheels and the terrific howling of wild beasts 
That dragged the wheels of the sun's chariot. And they put the sun 

525 Into the temple of Urizen, to give light to the Abyss, 

To light the war by day, to hide his secret braves by night 
The day for war, the night for secret religion in his temple. 

Los reared his mighty stature : on earth stood his feet, above 
The moon his furious forehead, circled with black bursting thunders, 
530 The naked limbs glittering upon the dark blue sky, his knees 
Bathed in bloody clouds, his loins in fires of war where spears 
And swords rage, where the eagles cry and the vultures laugh, saying : 

Now comes the night of carnage, and the flesh of kings and princes 
Pampered in palaces for our food, the blood of captains nurtured 
535 With lust and murder for our drink. The drunken raven shall wander 
All night among the slain and mock the wounded that groan in the 
field. 

6 * 



84 NIGHT VII. 

Thannas laughed, furious among the banners clothed with blood, 
Crying : As I will I rend the nations all asunder, rending 
The people. Vain their combinations, I will scatter them. 

M0 But thou, oh ! Son, whom I have crowned and enthroned the strong, 
I will preserve thee. Enemies rise round thee numberless. 
I will command my winds and they shall scatter them, or call 
My waters like a flood around thee. Fear not, trust in me, 
And I will give thee all the orbs of heaven for thy possession. 

345 In war shall thou bear rale, in blood shalt thou triumph for me, 
Because in times of everlasting I was rent in sunder, 
And what I loved, divided was among my enemies. 
My little daughters were made captives, and I saw them beaten 
With whips along the sultry roads. I heard those whom I loved 

.wo Crying in secret tents at night, and in the morn compelled 

To labour ; and, behold, my heart sunk down beneath in sighs, 
In sobbings, until all divided I divided was 
In twain, and, lo, my crystal form that in my bosom lived, 
Followed her daughters to the field of blood : they left me naked, 

.v>3 Alone, and they refused to return from the fields of the mighty. 
Therefore I will reward them as they have rewarded me ; 
1 will divide them in my anger, and thou, oh ! my king, 
Shalt gather them from out their graves, and put thy fetters on, 
And bind them to thee, that my crystal form may come to me. 

660 So cried the Demon of the Waters in the clouds of Los. 

Outstretched upon the hills lay Enitharmon. Clouds and temped 
Beat round her head all night : all day she riots in excess. 
But night and day Los follows war. The moon rolls over her, 
That, when Los waned upon the south, reflected the fierce fires 

665 Of his immortal head in north, upon faint Enitharmon. 

Red rage the furies of fierce Ore. Black thunders roll round Los, 
Flaming : his head like the sun seen through mist that magnifies 
The disk into a terrible vision to th' eyes of dreaming mortals. 

And Enitharmon, trembling in fear, uttered these words : 



NIGHT VII. 85 

570 I put not any trust in thee, nor in thy glittering scales ; 
Thy eyelids are a terror, and the flaming of thy crest ; 
The rustling of thy scales confounds me, thy hoarse rustling scales. 
And if that Los had not built me a bower upon a rock, 
I must have died in the dark desert among noxious worms. 

575 How shall I flee ? How shall I flee into the bower of Los ? 
My feet are turned backwards and my footsteps slide in clay, 
And clouds are closed round my towers. My arms labour in vain. 
Does not the God of Waters in the rocking elements 
Love those who hate, rewarding with his hate the living soul ? 

580 And must I not obey the God, thou shadow of jealousy ? 

I cry ; the watchman heareth not. I pour my voice in roarings : 
Watchman ! the night is thick, and darkness chokes my rayie sight. 
Lift up ! lift up ! oh, Los ! awake my watchman, for he sleepeth. 
Lift up ! lift up ! Shine forth, oh, Light ! Watchman, thy light is out. 

580 Oh, Los ! unless thou keep my tower the watchman will be slain. 

So Enitharmon cried upon her terrible earthy bed, 

While the broad oak wreathed his roots round her, forcing his dark 

way 
Through caves of death into existence. The beech, long-limbed, 

advanced 

Terrific into the pained heavens. The fruit-trees humanizing, 
590 Showed their immortal energies in warlike desperation, 

Rending the heavens and earths, and drinking blood in the hot battle 
To feed their fruit, to gratify their hidden sons and daughters, 
That far in close recesses of their secret palaces 
Viewed the vast war and joy'd therein writhing to vegetate 
595 Into the worlds of Enitharmon. Loud the roaring winds 

Burdened with clouds howl round the couch. Sullen the woolly sheep 
Walks through the battle. Dark and fierce the strong bull in his rage 
Propagates through the warring earth. The lions raging in flames, 
The tiger in redounding smoke, the serpent of the woods, 
With harsh songs every living soul. The prester serpent runs 
Along the ranks, crying, Listen to the priest of God, ye warriors, 



86 NIGHT VII. 

This cowl upon my head he placed in times of everlasting 
And said, Go forth and guide my battles. Like the pointed spears 
Of Man I made thee when I blotted Man from life and light. 
905 Take thou the seven diseases of Man. Store them for time to come, 
In store-houses, in secret places I will tell thee of, 
To be my great and awful curses at the appointed time. 
The prester serpent ceased. The war song sounded loud and strong 
Through all the heavens. Urizen wet, vibrated torrent on torrent. 

010 Now in the caverns of the grave and places of human seed 
The nameless shadowy vortex stood before the face of Ore. 
The shadow raised her dismal head over the flaming youth 
With sighs and howlings and deep sobs, that he might lose his rage, 
And with it lose himself in meekness. She embraced his fire, 

615 As when the Earthquake rises from his den, his shoulders huge 
Appear above the crumbling mountains, silence waits round him 
A moment. Then astounding horror belches from the centre, 
The fiery dogs arise again, the shoulders huge appear ; 
So Ore rolled round his clouds upon the deeps of dark Urthona. 

620 Knowing the arts of Urizen were pity and affection, 

And by these arts the serpent form exuded from his limbs 
Silent as is despairing love, and strong as jealousy, 
Jealousy that she was Vala, now become Urizen's harlot. 
And the harlot and the deluded harlot of the kings of the earth 

623 His soul was gnawn asunder 

The hairy shoulders rend the links, free are the wrists of fire, 
Red rage resounds, he roused his lions from his forests dark, 
They howl around the flaming youth, rending the nameless shadow, 
And running their immortal course through solid darkness borne. 

630 Loud sounds the war-song round red Ore in his resistless fury, 
And round the nameless shadowy female in her howling terror, 
When all the elemental gods joined in the wondrous song. 
Sound the war-trumpet terrific, souls clad in attractive steel ! 
Sound the shrill fife, serpents of war ! I hear the northern drum 



NIGHT VII. 87 

635 Awake ! I hear the flapping of the folding banners 

The dragons of the north put on their armour 

Upon the eastern sea .... they take their course .... 

The glittering of their horses and trappings stains the vault of night. 

Stop we the rising of the glorious king, spur, spur your steeds, 

640 Oh, northern drum. ! awake oh, hand of iron, sound 

The northern drum. Now give the charge ! Bravely obscured 
With deaths of wintry hail. Again the black bow draw : 
Again the elemental strings to your right breasts draw, 
And let the shadowy drum speed on the arrows black. 

645 The arrows flew from cloudy bow all day till blood, 

From east to west, flowed like the human victims in rivers 

Of life upon the plains of death and valleys of despair. 

Now sound the clarions of victory, now strip 

The slain, now clothe yourselves in golden arms, brothers of war, 

650 They sound the clarions strong, they chain the howling captives, 
They cast the lots into the helmet, they give the oath of blood, 
They vote the death of Luvah and they nailed him to a tree 
To die a death of six thousand years bound round with desolation. 
The sun was black and the moon rolled, a useless globe through 
heaven. 

655 Then left the sons of Urizen the plough and harrow and loom, 
The hammer and the chisel and the rule and compasses. 
They forged the sword, the chariot of war, the battle axe, 
The trumpet fitted to the battle, and the flute of summer, 
And all the arts of life they changed into the arts of death. 

660 The hour-glass contemned because its simple workmanship 

Was as the workmanship of the ploughman and the waterwheel 
That raises water into cisterns broken and burned with fire, 
Because its workmanship was like the workmanship of the shepherd, 
And in their stead intricate wheels, involved, wheel within wheel, 

660 To perplex youth in their outgoings, to bind the labourers 

Of day and night, the myriads of eternity, that they might file 



88 NIGHT VII. 

And polish brass and iron hour after hour, laborious work, 
Kept ignorant of the use ; that they might spend the days of wisdom 
In sorrowful drudgery to obtain a scanty pittance of bread, 
870 In ignorance to view a small portion and think that All, 
And call it demonsti-ation, blind to the simple rules of life. 

And now the battle rages round thy tender limbs, oh ! Vala. 

Now smile among thy bitter tears, now put on all thy beauty. 

Is not the wound of the sword sweet and the broken bone delightful ? 

73 Wilt thou now smile among the slain when the wounded groan in the 

fields? 

Lift up thy blue eyes, Vala, and put on thy sapphire shoes, 
On melancholy Magdalen, behold the morning breaks. 
Gird in thy flaming loins, descend into the sepulchre, 
Scatter the blood from thy golden bow and tears from thy silver locks, 

680 Shake off the water from thy wings, dust from thy white garments. 
Remember all thy feigned terrors on the secret couch 
When the sun rose in glowing morn with arms of mighty hosts 
Marching to battle, who was wont to rise with Urizea's harps 
Girt as a sower with his seed to scatter life abroad. 

685 Arise, oh ! Vala, bring the bow of Urizen, bring the swift arrows of 

light, 

How raged the golden horses of Urizen, bound to the chariot of love, 
Compelled to leave the plough to the ox, to snuff up desolation, 
To tramp cornfields in boastful neighings. This is no gentle harp, 
This is no warbling brook, nor shadow of a myrtle-tree, 
680 But blood and wounds and dismal cries and clarions of war, 
And hearts laid open to the light by the broad grizzly sword, 
And bowels hid in hammered steel ripped out upon the ground, 
Call forth thy smiles of soft deceit, call forth thy cloudy tears, 
We hear thy sighs in trumpets shrill when morn shall blood renew. 

686 So sang the demons of the deep. The clarions of war blew loud. 
Ore rent her, and his human form consumed in his own fires 
Mingled with her dolorous members, strewn through the abyss. 
She joyed in conflict, gratified and drinking tears of woe. 



NIGHT VII. 89 

No more remained of Ore but the serpent round the tree of mystery. 

700 The form of Ore was gone. He reared his serpent bulk among 
The stars of Urizen in furor, rending the form of life 
Into a formless indefinite and strewing her on the abyss 
Like clouds upon a winter sky, broken with wind and thunders. 
This was, to her, supreme delight. The warriors mourned disappointed. 

705 They go to war with many shouts and with loud clarions. 

Oh, pity ! They return with lamentations, mourning, weeping. 
Invisible or visible, drawn out in length or breadth, 
The shadowy female varied in the war in her delight. 
Howling in discontent, black, heavy uttering harsh sounds 

710 Wandering through fires and slimy weeds and making lamentations 
To deliver Tharmas in his rage, to soothe his furious soul, 
To stay his flight that Urizen might live although in pain. 
He said : Art thou bright Enion ? is the shadow of hope returned ? 

And she said : Tharmas, I am Vala, bless thy innocent face ! 
715 Doth Enion avoid the sight of thy blue watery eyes,? 

Be not persuaded that the air knows this, or the falling dew. 

Tharmas replied : Oh ! Vala, once I lived in a garden of delight ; 
I watered Enion in the morning and she lived always 
Among the apple-trees ; and all the garden of delight 

720 Swam like a dream before my eyes. I went to seek the steps 
Of Enion in the garden and the shadow compassed me 
And closed me in a watery world of woe where Enion stood 
Trembling before me like a shadow, like a mist, like air. 
And she is gone, and here alone I war with darkness and death. 

725 I hear thy voice, but not thy form see. Thou and all delight 

And life appear and vanish, mocking me with shadows of false hope. 
Hast thou forgot that the air listens through all its districts telling 
The subtlest thoughts shut up from light in chambers of the moon ? 

Tharmas, the moon has chambers where the babes of love lie hid, 
730 And whence they never can be brought in all Eternity 

Unless exposed by their vain parents. Lo, he whom I love 



90 NIGHT VII. 

Is hidden from mo, and I never in all Eternity 

Shall see him. Enitharmon and Ahania, combined with Enion, 

Hid him in that outrageous form of Ore, which torments me for sin 

735 For all my secret faults which he brings forth upon the light 

Of day in jealousy and blood. My children are led to Urizen's war 
Before my eyes, and for every one of these I am condemned 
To eternal torment in these flames, for though I have the power 
To rise on high, yet love here binds me down, and never, never 

740 Will I arise till him I love is loosed from this dark chain. 

Tharmas replied : Vala, thy sins have lost us heaven and bliss, 
Thou art our curse, and till I can bring love into the light 
I never will depart from my great wrath 

So Tharmas wailed. Dreadful they rode upon the stormy deep, 
745 Cursing the voice that mocked them with false hope in furious mood. 
Then she returned, swift as a blight upon the infant bred, 
Howling in all the notes of woe to stay his furious rage, 
Stamping the hills, wandering, swimming, flying furious, falling, 
Or like an earthquake rumbling in the bowels of the earth, 
760 Or like a cloud beneath, or like a fire flaming on high, 

Walking with pleasure on the hills or running in the dales 
Like to a rushing torrent beneath and a falling rock above, 
A thunder-cloud in the south and a chilling voice heard in the north. 

And she went forth and saw the forms of life and of delight 
755 Walking on mountains or flying in the open expanse of heaven. 
She heard sweet voices in the winds and in the voices of birds 
That rose from waters, for the waters were as the voice of Luvah, 
Not seen to her like waters or like this dark world of death, 
Though all those fair perfections which men know only by name 
760 In beautiful substantial forms appeared and served her 
As food or drink or ornament or in delightful works 
To build her bowers, for the elements brought forth abundantly 
The living soul in glorious forms, and everyone came forth 
Walking before her shadowy face and bowing at her feet. 






NIGHT VII. 91 

765 But in vain delights were poured forth on the howling melancholy. 
For her delight the horse his proud neck bowed, and his whole mane, 
And the strong lion deigned in his mouth to wear the golden bit, 
While the far-beaming peacock walked on the fragrant wind 
To bring her fruits of sweet delight from trees of richest wonder, 

770 And the strong eagle bore the fire of heaven in the night. 
Woo'd and subdued into eternal death the demon lay, 
In rage against the dark despair, the howling melancholy. 
For far and wide she stretched through all the worlds of Urizen's 

journey, 
And was adjoined to Beulah as the polypus to the rock. 

775 Mourning, the daughters of Beulah saw, nor could they have sustained 
The horrid sight of death and torment. But the Eternal promise 
They wrote on all their tombs and pillars and on every urn, 
These words, If ye will believe your brother shall rise again, 
In golden letters ornamented with sweet labours of love, 

780 Waiting in patience for the fulfilment of the promise Divine. 

And all the songs of Beulah sounded comfortable notes, 
Not suffering doubt to rise up from the clouds of the shadowy female. 
The myriads of the dead burst through the bottoms of their tombs, 
Descending on the shadowy female's clouds in spectrous terror, 
785 Beyond the limit of translucence on the lake of Udan Adan. 

These they named Satans, and in the aggregate they named them 
Satan. 



END OF THE SEVENTH NIGHT. 



Stgbt the 



Then all in great Eternity, which is called the counsel of God, 
Met as one Man, even Jesus, upon Gilead and Herraon, 
Upon the limit of contraction to awake the fallen Man. 
The fallen Man stretched like a corse upon the oosy rock, 

8 Washed with the tide, pale, overgrown with the waves, 

Just moved with horrible dreams, and waving high over his head 
Two winged immortal shapes were seen, one standing at his feet 
Toward the east, one standing at his head toward the west, 
Their wings joined in the Zenith overhead ; but other wings 

10 They had that clothed their bodies like a garment of soft down, 
Silvery, bright, shining upon the dark blue sky in silver. 
These wings touched the heavens. Their fair feet hovered above 
The swelling tides ; they bent over the dead corse like an arch, 
Pointed at the top in highest heaven of precious stones and pearl. 

15 Such is a vision of all Beulah hovering over the sleeper. 

The limit of contraction was now fixed, and Man began 

To wake upon the couch of death. He sneezed seven times, 

A tear of blood dropped from either eye. Again he reposed 

In the Saviour's arms, in the arms of tender mercy and loving kindness. 

20 Then Los said : I behold the Divine Vision through the broken gates 
Of thy poor broken heart, astonished, melted into compassion and love. 

Enitharmon said : I see the Lamb of God upon Mount Zion. 

Wondering with love and awe they felt the Divine Hand upon them ; 
For nothing could restrain the dead in Beulah from dissolving 
25 Unto Ulro's night, tempted by the shadowy females, sweet 

Delusive cruelty. They descend away from the daughters of Beulah 



NIGHT VIII. 93 

And enter Urizen's temple, Enitharmon pitying, and her heart 
Gates broken down. They descend through the gate of Pity 
The broken heart-gate of Enitharmon. She sighs them forth upon the 
wind 

30 Of Golgonooza. Los stood at the gate receiving them 
For Los could enter into Enitharmon's bosom and explore 
Its intricate labyrinths now the obdurate heart was broken 
From out the war of Urizen and Tharmas receiving them 
Into his hands. Then Enitharmon erected looms in Laban's gate, 

35 And called the looms Cathedron. In these looms slie wove the Spectres 
Bodies of vegetation. Singing lulling cadences to drive away 
Despair from the poor wandering spectres ; and Los loved them 
With, a parental love, for the Divine hand was upon him 
And upon Enitharmon, and the Divine countenance shone 

40 In Golgonooza. Looking down, the daughters of Beulah saw, 
With joy, the bright light, and in it a human form, 
And knew he was the Saviour, even Jesus : and they worshipped, 
Astonished, comforted, delighted, in notes of rapturous ecstacy. 

All Beulah stood astonished, looking down to Eternal Death. 
45 They saw the Saviour beyond the pit of Death and of Destruction. 
For whether they looked upward they saw the Divine Vision, 
Or whether they looked downward still they saw the Divine Vision, 
Surrounding them on all sides beyond sin and death and hell. 

And Enitharmon, now in tears, singing songs of lamentation 
50 And pitying comfort, as she sighs forth on the wind the Spectre, 
Also the vegetated bodies which Enitharmon wove, 
Opened within their hearts, and in their loins, and in their brain. 
To Beulah ; and the dead in Ulro descended from the war 
Of Urizen and Tharmas, and from the shadowy female's clouds. 
55 And some were woven single, and some twofold, and some threefold, 
In head or heart or reins, according to the fittest order 
Of most merciful pity and compassion to the spectrous dead. 

When Urizen saw the Lamb of God clothed in Luvah's robes, 



94 NIGHT VIII. 

Perplexed and terrified he stood, though well he knew that Ore 
60 Was Luvah. But he now beheld a new Luvah, or Ore, 
Who assumed Luvah's form and stood before him opposite. 

But he saw Ore, a serpent form, augmenting times on times 

In the fierce battle ; and he saw the Lamb of God and the world of Los 

Surrounded by his dark machine, for Ore augmented swift 

65 In fury, a serpent wondrous amongst the constellations of Urizen. 
A crest of fire rose on his forehead, red as a carbuncle, 
Beneath, down to his eyelids, scales of pearl, then gold and silver 
Inmingled with the ruby, overspread his visage down 
His furious neck ; writhing, contorted in dire budding pains. 

70 The scaly armour shot out. Stubborn down his back and bosom 
The emerald, orange, sulphur, jasper, beryl, amethyst, 
Stood, in terrific emulation which should gain a place 
Upon the mighty fiend the fruit of the mysterious tree 
Kneaded in Uvith's kneading trough. Still Ore devoured the food 

75 In raging hunger. Still the pestilential food, in gems and gold, 
Exuded round his awful limbs, stretching to serpent length 
His human bulk. While the dark shadowy female, brooding o'er, 
Measured his food morning and evening in cups and baskets of iron. 
With tears of sorrow incessant she laboured the food of Ore, 

80 Compelled by the iron-hearted sisters, daughters of Urizen. 
Gathering the fruit of that mysterious tree, circling its root, 
She spread herself through all the branches in the form of Ore. 

Thus Urizen, in soft deceit, his warlike preparations fabricated. 

And when all things were finished, sudden waved among the stars 
* His hurtling hand gave the dire signal. Thund'rous clarions blow. 

And all the hollow deep re-bellowed with the thund'rous war. 

But Urizen his mighty rage let loose in the mid-deep. 

Sparkles of dire afflictions issued round his frozen limbs. 

Horrible hooks and nets he formed, twisting the cords of iron 
90 And brass and molten metals, cast in hollow globes and bored 

Tubes in petrific steel, and rammed combustibles, and wheels 



NIGHT VIII. 95 

And chains and pulleys, fabricated all round the heavens of Los, 
Communing with the serpent Ore in dark dissimulation, 
And with the Synagogue of Satan in dark Sanhedrin, 
95 To undermine the world of Los, to tear bright Enitharmon 
To the four winds, hopeless of future. All futurity 
Seems teeming with endless destruction never to be expelled ; 
Desperate remorse swallows the present in a quenchless rage. 

The battle howls, the terrors fired rage in the work of death ; 
100 Enormous work. Los contemplated, inspired by the holy Spirit. 

Los builds the walls of Grolgonooza against the stirring battle, 

That only through the gates of death they can enter to Enitharmon. 

Raging they take the human visage and the human form, 

Feeling the hand of Los in Golgonooza, and the force 
105 Attractive of his hammers beating, and the silver looms 

Of Enitharmon singing lulling cadences on the wind. 

They humanize in the fierce battle, where in direful pain, 

Terrified and astonished, Urizen beheld the battle take a form 

Which he intended not, a shadowy hermaphrodite, black and opaque, 
110 The soldiers named it Satan, but he was as yet unformed and vast. 

Hermaphroditic it at length became, hiding the male 

Within as in a tabernacle, abominable, deadly. 

Troop by troop the bestial drove rend one another, sounding loud 

The instruments of sound ; and troop by troop, in human forms, they 

urge 
115 The dire confusion till the battle faints. Those that remain 

Return in pangs and horrible convulsions to their bestial state ; 

For the monsters of the elements, lions or tigers or wolves 

Sound loud the howls, music inspired by Los and Enitharmon 
sounding loud and terrific. Men 

They seem to one another, laughing terrible among the banners. 
120 And when the revolution of the day of battles was o'er, 

Relapsing in dire torment, they return to forms of woe, 

To moping visages, retiring, inanimate, furious. 

No more erect, though strong, drawn out in length they ravin 



96 NIGHT VIII. 

For senseless gratification, and their visages thrust forth, 
1M Flatten above and beneath and stretch out into bestial length. 

Weakened they stretch beyond their power in dire droves till war 

begins, 
Or secret religion in their temples before secret shrines. 

And Urizen gave life and sense by his immortal power 

To all his engines of deceit, that linked chains might run 
130 Through ranks of war, spontaneous : that hooks and boring screws 

Might act according to their forms by innate cruelty. 

He formed also harsh instruments of sound 

To grate the soul into destruction, or to inflame with fury 

The spirits of life, to pervert all the faculties of sense 
135 Into their own destruction, if perhaps he might avert 

His own despair even at the cost of everything that breathes. 

Thus in the temple of the sun his books of iron and brass 
And silver and gold he consecrated, reading incessantly 
To myriads of perturbed spirits : through the universe 

140 They propagated the deadly words, the shadowy female absorbing 
The enormous science of Urizen, age after age exploring 
The fell destruction, and she said : Oh ! Urizen, Prince of Light, 
What words of dread pierce my faint ear ? What falling snows around 
My feeble limbs enfold my destined misery ? 

145 I alone dare the last abide to sit beneath the blast 

Unhurt, and dare the inclement forehead of the King of Light, 
From dark abysses of the times remote, fated to be. 
The Sorrower of Eternity in love with tears, submiss I rear 
My eyes to thy Pavilions. Hear my prayer for Luvah's sake. 

150 I see the murderer of my Luvah clothed in robes of blood, 
He who assumed my Luvah's robes in times of Everlasting 
Where hast thou hid him whom I love ; in -what remote abyss 
Resides that God of my delight ? Oh ! might my eyes behold 
My Luvah, then would I deliver all the Sons of God 

155 From bondage of these terrors, and with influences sweet, 



NIGHT VIII. 97 

As once in those eternal fields of brotherhood and love, 

United we should live in bliss as those who sinned not. 

The Eternal Man is sealed by thee, never to be delivered. 

We are all servants to thy will. Oh ! King of Light, relent 
ir,o Thy furious power ; be our father and our loved king. 

But if my Luvah is no more, if thou hast smitten him 

And laid him in the sepulchre, or if thou wilt revenge 

His murder on another, silent I bow with dread. 

But happiness can never come to thee, oh ! King, nor me, 
165 ]? or h e wag the source of every joy that this mysterious tree 

Unfolds in allegoric fruit. When shall the dead revive ? 

Can that which has existed cease ? Can love and life expire ? 

Urizen heard the voice, and saw the shadow underneath 
His woven darkness, and in laws and deceitful religions, 

170 Beginning at the tree of Mystery, circling its roost, 

He spread himself through all the branches in the power of Ore, 
A shapeless and indefinite cloud, in tears of sorrow incessant. 
Steeping the direful web of religion, swagging, heavy, it fell 
From heaven to earth, through all its meshes, altering the vortexes, 

175 Misplacing every centre. Hungry desire and lust began 
Gathering the fruit of that mysterious tree, till Urizen, 
Sitting within his temple, furious, felt the ruining stupor, 
Himself caught in his own net, in sorrow, lust, repentance. 

Enitharmon wove in tears, singing songs of lamentations, 
180 And pitying comfort as she sigh'd forth on the wind the spectres, 
And wove them bodies, calling them her beloved sons and daughters, 
Employing the daughters in her looms, and Los employed the sons 
In Golgonooza's furnaces among the anvils of time and space. 
Thus forming a vast family, wondrous in beauty and love, 
185 And they appeared a Universal female form created 

From those who were dead in Ulro, from the spectres of the dead. 

And Enitharmon named the female Jerusalem the Holy. 
Wondering, she saw the Lamb of God within Jerusalem's veil ; 

7 



98 NIGHT VIII. 

The Divine Vision seen within the inmost deep recess 
190 Of fair Jerusalem's bosom in a gently beaming fire. 

Then sang the sons of Eden round the Lamb of God, and said, 

Glory, Glory Glory to the Holy Lamb of God, 

Who now beginneth to put off the dark Satanic body. 

Now we behold redemption. Now we know that life eternal 

195 Depends alone upon the Universal hand, and not in us 

Is aught but death. In individual weakness, sorrow and pain, 
We behold with wonder Enitharmon's looms and Los's forges, 
And the spindles of Tirzah and Bahab, and the mills of Satan and 

Beelzebub. 
In Golgonooza Los's anvils stand and his furnaces rage, 

800 The hard dentant hammers lulled by the flutes' lula-lula 
The bellowing furnaces blaze by the long resounding clarions, 
Ten thousand demons labour at the forges creating continually 
The times and spaces of Mortal life, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, 
In periods of pulsative furor, breaking into wedges and bars, 

805 Then drawing into wires the terrific Passions and Affections 
Of Spectrous Dead, thence to the looms of Cathedron conveyed. 
The daughters of Enitharmon weave the ovarium and integument 
In soft silk, drawn from their own bowels in lascivious delight, 
With songs of sweetest cadence to the turning spindle and reel, 

210 Lulling the weeping spectres of the dead, clothing their limbs 
With gifts and gold of Eden. Astonished, stupefied with delight, 
The terrors put on their sweet clothing on the banks of Arnon, 
Whence they plunge into the river of space for a period, until 
The dread sleep of Ulro is passed. But Satan, Og, and Sihon 

818 Build mills of resistless wheels to unwind the soft threads and reveal 
Naked of their clothing the poor spectres before the accusing heavens, 
While Rahab and Tirzah far different mantles prepare, webs of torture, 
Mantles of despair, girdles of bitter compunction, shoes of indolence, 
Veils of ignorance, covering from head to foot with a cold web. 

820 We look down into Ulro, and we behold the wonders of the grave. 
Eastward of Golgonooza stands the lake of Udan A.dan, in 



NIGHT VIII. 99 

Entuthon Benython, a lake not of waters but of spaces, 
Perturbed, black, and deadly. On its strands and its margins, 
The mills of Satan and Beelzebub stand round the roots of Urizen's 
tree, 

225 p or this lake is formed of the tears and sighs and death-sweat of the 

victims 

Of Urizen's laws, to irrigate the roots of the tree of Mystery. 
They unweave the soft threads, then they weave them anew in forms 
Of dark death and despaii*, and none from Eternity to Eternity could 

escape. 
But thou Universal Humanity, who is One Man, blessed for ever, 

2 30 Receivest the integuments woven. Rahab beholds the Lamb of God. 
She smites with her knife of flint. She destroys her own work 
Times upon times, thinking to destroy the Lamb, blessed for ever. 
He puts off the clothing of blood, he redeems spectres from their 

bonds. 
He awakes sleepers in Ulro. The daughters of Beulah praise him, 

233 They anoint his feet with ointment, they wipe them with the hairs of 

their head. 

We now behold the ends of Beulah, and we now behold, 
Where death eternal is put off eternally. Oh ! Lamb, 
Assume the dark Satanic body in the Virgin's womb. 
Oh ! Lamb Divine, it cannot thee annoy ! Oh ! pitying one, 

240 Thy pity is from the foundation of the world, and thy Redemption 
Begins already in Eternity. Come, then, oh ! Lamb of God, 
Come, Lord Jesus, quickly. 

So saying in Eternity, looking down into Beulah, 

The war roared round Jerusalem's gates. It took a hideous form 

245 Seen in the aggregate, a vast Hermaphroditic form, 

Heaved like an earthquake, labouring with convulsive groans 
Intolerable. At length an awful wonder burst 
From the Hermaphroditic bosom. Satan, he was named 
Son of Perdition, terrible his form, dishumanized, monstrous, 

250 A male without a female counterpart, a howling fiend 

7 * 



100 NIGHT VIII. 

Forlorn of Eden, and repugnant to the forms of life 
Yet hiding the shadowy female Vala, as in an ark and curtains 
Abhorred, accursed, ever dying an eternal death. 
Being multitudes of tyrant men in union blasphemous 
235 Against the Divine Image, congregated assemblies of wicked men. 

Pitying, the Lamb of God descended through Jerusalem's gates 
To put off the Mystery, time after time, and as a Man 
Is born on earth, so was he born of fair Jerusalem 
In Mystery's woven mantle, and in the robes of Lavah. 
260 He stood in fair Jerusalem to awake up into Eden 
The fallen Man, but first to give his vegetated body 
To be cut off that the Spiritual body may be revealed. 

The Lamb of God stood before Satan opposite, 

In Entuthon Benython, in the shadows of torment and woe, 

265 Upon the heights of Amalek, taking refuge in his arms. 

The victims fled from punishment, for all his words were peace. 
Urizen called together the synagogue of Satan in dark Sanhedrin, 
To Judge the Lamb of God to death as a murderer and a robber, 
As it is written he was numbered among the transgressors. 

270 Cold, dark, opaque, the assembly met twelvefold in Amalek, 

Twelve rocky unshaped forms, terrific forms of torture and woe, 
Such seemed the synagogue to distant view, amidst them beamed 
A false female counterpart of Lovely Delusive Beauty, 
Dividing and uniting at will in cruelties of holiness, 

275 Vala, drawn down into a vegetative body, now triumphant, 

The synagogue of Satan clothed her with scarlet robes and gems, 
And on her forehead was her name, written in blood, " Mystery." 
When viewed remote she is One, when viewed near she divides 
To multitudes, as it is in Eden, so permitted because 

280 It was the best possible in the state called Satan to save 
From Death Eternal, and to put off Satan continually. 
The synagogue created her from fruit of Urizen's tree, 
By Devilish arts, abominable, unlawful, unutterable, 



NIGHT VIII. 101 

Perpetually vegetating in detestable birth 
285 Of female forms, beautiful through poisons hidden in secret, 

Which give attraction to false beauty. Then was hidden within 
The bosom of Satan the False Female, as in an ark and veil, 
Which Christ must rend and her reveal. Her daughters are called 
Tirzah. She is named Rahab. Their various divisions are called 
290 The daughters of Amalek, Canaan, and Moab, binding on the stones 
Their victims, and with knives wounding them, singing with tears 
Over their victims. Hear ye the song of the females of Amalek. 



Oh, thou poor human form ! Oh, thou poor child of woe ! 
Why dost thou wander away from Tirzah ; why we compel to bind 
thee? 

295 If thou dost go away from me, I shall consume upon the rocks 
These fibres of thine eyes that used to wander in distant heavens 
Away from me. I have bound down with a hot iron chain 
These nostrils that expanded with delight in morning skies, 
I have bent downward with lead molten in my furnaces. 

300 My sou i i s seven furnaces, incessant roar the bellows, 
Upon my terribly flaming heart the molten metal runs 
In channels through my fiery limbs. Oh, Love ! Oh, Pity ! Oh, Pain! 
Oh, the pangs, the bitter pangs of love forsaken ! 
Ephraim was a wilderness of joy where all my wild beasts ran. 

305 The River Kanah wandered by my sweet Manasseh's side. 
Go, Noah, fetch the girdle of strong brass, heat it red hot, 
Press it around the loins of this expanding cruelty. 
Shriek not so, my only love. 
Bind him down, sisters, bind him down on Ebal, mount of cursing. 

310 Malah, come forth from Lebanon, and Hoglah from Mount Sinai 
Come, circumscribe this tongue of sweets, and with a screw of iron 
Fasten this ear into the rock. Milcah, the task is thine. 
Weep not so, sisters, weep not so ; our life depends on this. 
Or Mercy and Truth are fled away from Shechem and Mount Gilead, 

318 Unless my beloved is bound down on the stems of Vegetation. 



102 NIGHT Till. 

Such are the songs of Tirzah, such the loves of Amalek. 

The Lamb of God descended through the nether portions of Luvah, 

Bearing his sorrows and receiving all his cruel wounds. 

Thus was the Lamb of God condemned to death. 
820 They nailed him upon the tree of Mystery, weeping over him, 

And then mocking, and then worshipping, calling him Lord and King. 
Sometimes as twelve daughters lovely, sometimes as five, 
They stood in beaming beauty. Sometimes as one, even Bahab, 
Who is Mystery, Babylon the great, mother of Harlots. 

825 Jerusalem saw the body dead upon the Cross. She fled away, 

Saying : Is this Eternal death ? Where shall I hide from death ? 

Pity me, Los ! Pity me, Urizen ! and let us build 

A Sepulchre, and worship Death in fear while yet we live 

Death ! God of all ! From whom we rise, to whom we all return, 

838 And let all nations of the Earth worship at the Sepulchre 

"With gifts and spices, and with lamps embossed, jewels and gold. 

Los took the body from the Cross, Jerusalem weeping over, 
They bore it to the Sepulchre, which Los had hewn in the rock 
Of Eternity for himself : he heard it despairing of Life Eternal. 

835 But when Rahab had cut off the Mantle of Luvah from 

The Lamb of God, it rolled apart, revealing to all in heaven 

And all in earth, the Temple, the Synagogue of Satan, and Mystery, 

Even Bahab in all her turpitude. Bahab divided herself 

She stood before Los in her pride among the Furnaces, 

340 Dividing and uniting in delusive feminine powers, questioning him. 
He answered her with tenderness and love, not uninspired. 

Los sat upon his anvil stock. They sat beside the forge. 
Los wiped the sweat from his red brow, and thus began 
To the delusive female forms shining among his furnaces : 

846 I am that shadowy prophet who, six thousand years ago, 
Fell from my station in the Eternal bosom. I divided 



NIGHT VIII. 103 

To multitude and my multitudes are children of care and labour. 

Oh ! Rahab, I behold thee. I was once like thee, a son 

Of Pride, and I have pierced the Lamb of God in pride and wrath. 

860 Hear me repeat my generations that thou may'st also repent. 

And these are the generations of Los and Enitharmon, Rintrah, 

Palamabron, 

Theotormon, Bromion, Antamon, Ananton, Ozoth, Ohana, 
Sotha, Mydon, Ellayol, Natha, Gon, Hurlath, Satan, 
Har, Ochim, Ijim, Adam, Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Dan, Naphali, 

355 Gad, Asher, Issachar, Zebulun, Joseph, Benjamin, David, Solomon, 
Paul, Constantine, Charlemagne, Luther, Milton. 
These are our daughters : Ocalythron, Elynitria, Oothoon, Leutha, 
Elythiria, Enanto, Manatha Varcyon, Ethinthus, Moab, Midian, 
Aah, Tullah, Caina, JSTaamah, Tamar, Rahab, Tirzah, Mary. 

860 And myriads more of sons and daughters to whom our loves increased, 
To each according to the multiplication of their multitudes. 
But Satan accused Palamabron before his brethren, also he maddened 
The horses of Palamabron's harrow, wherefore Rintrah and Palamabron 
Cut him off from Golgonooza. But Enitharmon, in tears, 

865 Wept over him, and created him a space with a tender moon, 
As he rolled down beneath the fires of Ore, a globe immense 
Crested with snow in a dim void. Here, by the arts of Urizen, 
He tempted many of the sons and daughters of Los to flee 
Away from them. First Reuben fled, then Simeon, then Levi, then 
Judah, 

370 Then Dan, then Naphali, then Gad, then Asher, then Issachar, 
Then Zebulun, then Joseph, then Benjamin, twelve sons of Los. 
And this is the manner in which Satan became the tempter. 
There is a state named Satan. Learn distinct to know, oh ! Rahab 
The difference between states and individuals of those states. 

373 The state named Satan never can be redeemed to all Eternity. 
But when Luvah in Ore became a Serpent, he descended into 
That state called Satan. Enitharmon breathed forth on the winds 
Of Golgonooza her well beloved, knowing he was Ore's human remains. 
She tenderly loved him above all his brethren. He grew up 



104 SIGHT viii. 

880 In mother's tenderness. The enormous worlds rolling in Urizen's 

power 

Must have given Satan, by these mild arts, dominion over all, 
Wherefore Palamabron being accused by Satan to Los, 
Called down a great solemn assembly. Rintrah, in fury and fear, 
Defended Palamabron, and rage filled the universal tent. 

885 Because Palamabron was good-natured, Satan supposed he feared him, 
And Satan not having the science of wrath, but only of pity, 
Was soon condemned, and wrath was left to wrath, and pity to pity. 
Rintrah and Palamabron, cut sheer off from Golgonooza, 
Enithannon's moony space, and in it, Satan and his companions. 

890 They rolled down a dim world, crushed with snow, deadly and dark. 
Jerusalem, pitying them, wove them mantles of life and death, 
Times after times, and those in Eden set Lucifer for their guard. 
Lucifer refused to die for Satan. In pride he foi-sook his charge. 
They sent Molech. Molech was impatient. They sent 

386 Molech impatient they sent Elohim, who created Adam, 
To die for Satan. Adam refused, but was compelled to die 
By Satan's arts. Then the eternals sent Shaddai. 
Shaddai was angry. Pahad descended. Pahad was terrified. 
And then they sent Jehovah, who, leprous, stretched his hand to 
Eternity. 

400 Then Jesus came, and died willing beneath Tirzah and Rahab. 

Thou art that Rahab. To the tomb. What can we purpose more ? 
To Enitharmon, terrible and beautiful in eternal youth, 
Bow down before her, you, her children. Set Jerusalem free. 

Rahab, burning with pride and revenge, departed from Los. 
4os Los dropped a tear at her departure, but he wiped it away in hope. 
She went to Urizen in pride. The Prince of Light beheld 
Revealed before the face of heaven his secret holiness. 
Darkness and sorrow covered all flesh. Eternity was darkened. 

Urizen sitting in his web of deceitful religion 
410 Felt the female death, a dull and numbing stupor, such as never 



NIGHT VIII. 105 

Before assaulted the bright human form. He felt his pores 
Drink in the deadly dull delusion. Terrors of Eternal Death 
Shot through him. Urizen sat stonied upon his rock. 
Forgetful of his own laws, petrifying he began to embrace 

415 The shadowy female. Since life cannot be quenched, life exuded, 
His eyes shot forward, then his breathing nostrils drawn forth. 
Scales covered over a cold forehead and a neck outstretched 
Into the deep to seize the shadow. Scales his neck and bosom 
Covered ; scales his hands and feet. Upon his belly falling 

420 Outstretched through the immense ; his mouth wide open, tongueless, 
His teeth a triple row, he strove to seize the shadow in vain, 
And his immense tail lashed the abyss. His human form a stone. 
A form of senseless stone remained in terrors on the rock, 
Abominable to the eyes of mortals who explore his books. 

425 His wisdom still remained, and all his memory stored with woe. 
And still his stony form remained in the abyss immense, 
Like the pale visage in its sheet of lead that cannot follow. 
Incessant stern disdain his scaly form gnaws inwardly, 
With deep repentance for the loss of that fair form of Man. 

430 With envy he saw Los, with envy Tharmas and TJrthona, 
With envy and in vain he swam around his stony form. 
No longer now erect, the king of light, outstretched in fury, 
Lashes his tail in the wide deep. His eyelids, like the sun 
Arising in his pride, enlightens all the grizzly deeps, 

435 His scales transparent give forth light like windows of the morning, 
His neck flames with wrath and majesty. He lashes the deeps, 
Beating the deserts and the rocks ; the deserts feel his power. 
They shake their slumbers off, they wave in awful fear, 
Calling the lion and the tiger, the horse and the wild stag, 

440 The elephant, the wolf and bear, the llama and the satyr. 

His eyelids give their light around. His foaming tail aspires 
Among the stars. The earth and all the abysses feel his fury. 
When, as the snow covers the mountains, oft petrific hardness 
Covers the deeps at "his vast fury, moving in his rock, 

445 Hardens the lion and the bear, writhing in the solid mountain. 



106 NIGHT VIH. 

They view the light and wonder, crying out in terrible existence. 
Up-bound the wild stag and the horse, behold the king of pride. 
Oft doth his eye emerge from the abyss into the realms 
Of his eternal day, and memory strives to augment his rnthfulness. 

460 Then weeping he descends in wrath, drawing all things in his f nry 
Into obedience to his will, and now he finds in vain 
That not of his own power he bore the human form erect, 
Nor of his own will gave his laws in times of everlasting. 

For now fierce Ore in wrath and fury risen into the heavens, 
455 A king of wrath and fury, a dark enraged horror, 

And Urizen, repentant, forgets his wisdom in the abyss 
In forms of priesthood, in the dark delusions of repentance, 
Repining in his heart and spirit that Ore reigned over all, 
And that his wisdom served but to augment the indefinite lust. 

480 Then Tharmas and TJrthona felt the stony stupor rise 

Into their limits. Urthona shot forth a vast fibrous form. 
Tharmas like a pillar of sand rolled round by the whirlwind, 
An animated pillar rolling round in incessant rage. 

Los felt the stony stupor and his head rolled down beneath 
465 Into the abysses of his bosom. The vessels of his blood 

Dart forth upon the wind in pipes, writhing about in the abyss, 

And Enitharmon, pale and cold, in milky juices flowed 

Into a form of vegetation, living, having a voice, 

Moving in root-like fibres, breathing in fear upon the earth. 

470 And Tharmas gave his power to Los, Urithona gave his strength 
Into the youthful prophet for the love of Enitharmon 
And of the nameless shadowy female, into the nether deep, 
And for the dread of the dark terror of Ore and Urizen. 

Thus in a living death the nameless shadow all things bound, 
478 All mortal things made permanent that they may be put off 






NIGHT VIII. 107 

Time after time by the Divine Lamb who died for all, 
And all in him died and he put off all mortality. 

Tharmas on high rode furious through the afflicted worlds, 
Pursuing the vain shadow of hope, fleeing from identity 
480 In abstract false essences that he may not hear the voice : 
The voice incessant calls on all the children of Men, 
For she spoke of all in heaven and all upon the earth, 
Saw not yet the Divine Vision. Her eyes are toward Urizen, 
And thus Ahania cries aloud to the caverns of the grave : 

485 Will you keep a flock of wolves and lead them ? Will you take the 

wintry blast 
For a covering to your limbs or the summer pestilence for a tent to 

abide in ? 

Will you erect a lasting habitation in the mouldering churchyard ; 
Or a pillar and palace of Eternity in the jaws of the hungry grave ? 
Will you scent pleasure from the festering wound, or marry for a wife 
The ancient leprosy that the king and priest may feast on your decay ? 
And the grave mock and laugh at the ploughed field saying, 
I am the nourisher, thou the destroyer ; in my bosom is milk and wine, 
And a fountain from my breasts. To me come all multitudes 
To my breasts. They obey, they worship me. I am goddess and queen. 
But listen to Ahania, oh ! ye sons of the murdered one, 
Listen to her whose memory beholds your ancient days, 
Listen to her whose eye beholds the dark body of corruptible death 
Looking for Urizen in vain. In vain I seek for morning. 
The Eternal Man sleeps in the earth, nor feels the glorious sun 
Nor silent moon, nor all the hosts of heaven move in his body. 
His fiery halls are dark, and round his limbs the serpent Ore 
Fold without fold encompasses him, and his corrupting members 
Do vomit out the scaly monsters of the restless deep. 
They come up in the rivers and among the nether parts 
Of Man who lays upon the shore, leaning his faded head 
Upon the oozy rock enwrapt with the weeds of death. 



108 NIGHT VIII. 

His eyes sink hollow in his head. His flesh covered with slime 
And shrunk up to the bones. Alas ! that Man should come to this ! 
His strong bones beat with snows and hid within the caves of night, 

610 Marrowless, bloodless, falling into dust, driven by the winds. 
Oh ! how the horrors of Eternal Death take hold on Man. 
His faint groans shake the caves and issue through the desolate rocks, 
And the strong eagle now with numbing cold, blighted of feathers, 
Once like the pride of the sun now flagging on cold night, 

615 Hovers with blasted wings aloft, watching with eagle eye 

Till Man shall leave a corruptible body. He, famished, hears him 

groan, 

And now he fixes his strong talons in the pointed rock, 
And now he beats the heavy air with his enormous wings. 
Beside him lies the lion dead, and in his belly worms 

620 Feast on his death till universal death devours all, 

And the pale horse seeks for the pool to lie him down and die, 
But finds the pool filled with serpents devouring one another. 
He droops his head and trembling stands, and his bright eyes decay. 
These are the visions of my eyes, the visions of Ahania. 

625 Thus cries Ahania. Enion replies from the caverns of the grave : 
Fear not, oh poor forsaken one. Oh land of grass and thorns, 
Where once the olive flourished and the cedar spread his wings. 
Once I wailed desolate like thee ; my fallow fields in fear 
Cried to the churchyards and the earthworm came in dismal state. 

630 I found him in my bosom, and I said the time of love 

Appears upon the rocks and hills in silent shades, but soon 
A voice came in the night, a midnight cry upon the mountains : 
Awake ! The Bridegroom cometh ! I awoke to sleep no more. 
But an eternal consummation is dark Enion. 

685 The watery grave. Oh ! thou cornfield. Oh ! thou vegetative happy. 
More happy is the dark consumer. Hope drowns all my torment, 
For I am now surrounded by a shadowy vortex drawing 
The spectre quite away from Enion that I die a death 
Of bitter hope, although I consume in these raging waters, 



NIGHT VIII. 109 

** The furrowed field replies to the grave, I hear her reply to me, 
Behold the time approaches fast that thou shalt "be as a thing 
Forgotten. When one speaks of thee he will not be believed. 
When the man gently fades away in his immortality. 
When the mortal disappears in improved knowledge, cast away 

545 The former things ; so shall the mortal gently fade away, 
And so become invisible to those who still remain. 
Listen. I will tell thee what is done in the caverns of the grave. 
The Lamb of Grod has rent the veil of mystery, soon to return 
In clouds and fires around the rock, and thy mysterious tree. 

650 And as the seed waits eagerly watching for its flower and fruit, 
Anxious its little soul looks out into the clear expanse 
To see if hungry winds are abroad with their invisible array. 
So Man looks out in tree, and herb, and fish, and bird, and beast, 
Collecting up the scattered portions of his immortal body 

555 Into the elemental forms of everything that grows. 

He tries the sullen north wind, riding on its angry furrows, 
The sultry south when the sun rises, and the angry east 
When the sun sets and the clods harden and the cattle stand 
Drooping, and the birds hide in their silent nests. He stores his 
thoughts 

560 As in store-houses in his memory. He regulates the forms 
Of all beneath and all above, and in the gentle west 
Reposes where the sun's heat dwells. .He rises to the sun 
And to the planets of the night, and to the stars that gild 
The Zodiacs, and the stars that sullen stand to north and south 

565 He touches the remotest pole, and in the centre weeps 

That Man should labour and sorrow, and learn and forget and return 
To the dark valley whence he came, and begin his labours anew. 
In pain he sighs, in pain he labours, and his universe 
Sorrowing in birds over the deep, or howling in the wolf 

670 Over the slain, and moaning in the cattle, and in the winds, 
And weeping over Ore and Urizen in clouds and dismal fires, 
And in the cries of birth and in the groans of death his voice 
Is heard throughout the universe. Wherever a grass grows 



110 NIGHT Vin. 

Or a leaf buds, the Eternal Man is seen, is heard, is felt, 
575 And all his sorrows, till he re-assumes his ancient bliss. 

Such are the words of Ahania and Enion, and Los hears and weeps. 
And Los and Enitharmon took the body of the Lamb 
Down from the cross, and placed it in a sepulchre he had hewn 
For himself in the rock of Eternity, trembling and in despair. 
680 Jerusalem wept over the sepulchre two thousand years. 



END OP THE EIGHTH NIGHT. 






BEING 



THE LAST JUDGMENT, 



And Los and Enitharmon builded Jerusalem, weeping 
Over the sepulchre and over the crucified body, 
Which, to their phantom eyes, appeared still in the sepulchre. 
But Jesus stood beside them in the spirit, separating 
5 Their spirit from their body. Terrified at Non-Existence 

For such they deemed the death of the body Los his vegetable hands 
Outstretched, his right hand branching out in fibrous strength, 
Seized the sun. His left hand, like dark roots, covered the moon, 
And tore them down, cracking the heavens across from immense to 
immense. 

10 Then fell the fires of eternity with loud and shrill 

Sound of loud trumpet thundering along from heaven to heaven. 
A mighty sound articulate : Awake, ye dead, and come 
To Judgment from the four winds ; awake and come away. 
Folding like scrolls of the enormous volume of heaven and earth, 

15 With thund'rous noise and dreadful shakings, rocking to and fro, 
The heavens are shaken, and the earth removed from its place, 
The foundations of the eternal hills are all discovered, 
The thrones of kings are shaken, they have lost their robes and crowns, 
The poor smite their oppressors, they awake up to the harvest, 

20 The naked warriors rush together down to the sea-shore 
Trembling before the multitude of slaves now set at liberty. 
They become like wintry flocks, like forests stripped of leaves. 
The oppressed pursue like the wind. There is no room for escape, 



112 NIGHT IX. 

The spectre of Enitharmon let loose upon the troubled deep, 

* Wailed shrill in the confusion, and the spectre of Urthona 
Received her in the darkening south. Their bodies lost, they stood 
Trembling and weak, and faint embrace, a fierce desire as when 
Two shadows mingle on a wall. They wail, and shadowy tears 
Fell down, and shadowy forms of joy mixed with despair and grief 

30 Their bodies buried in the ruins of the universe, 

Mingled with the confusion. Who shall call them from their graves ? 
Bahab and Tirzah wail aloud in the wild flames. They give up them- 
selves to consummation. 

The books of Urizen unroll with dreadful noise. The folding serpent 
Of Ore began to consume in fierce raving fire. His fierce flame 

33 Issued on all sides, gathering strength in animating volumes. 
Roaming abroad on all the winds, raging intent, reddening 
Into restless pillars of fire, rolling round and round, gathering 
Strength from the earth's consumed, and heavens, and all hidden 

abysses, 
Wherever the Eagle has explored, or Lion or Tiger trod, 

40 Or where the comets of the night, or stars of asterial day 

Have shot their arrows or long--beamed spears in wrath or fury. 

And all the while the trumpet sounds, Awake, ye dead, and come 
To Judgment. From the clotted gore, and from the hollow den, 
Start forth the trembling millions into flames of mental fire, 

45 Bathing their limbs in the bright visions of Eternity. 

Then, like the doves from pillars of smoke, the trembling families 
Of women and children throughout every nation under heaven 
Cling round the men in bands of twenties and of fifties, pale 
As snow that falls around a leafless tree upon the green. 

50 Their oppressors have fallen, they have stricken, they awake to life, 
Yet pale. The just man stands erect, and looking up to heaven, 
Trembling and stricken by the universal stroke. The trees uproot, 
The rocks groan horrible and run about. The mountains and 
The rivers cry with a dismal cry. The cattle gather together ; 

* Lowing they kneel before the heavens. The wild beasts of the forests 



NIGHT IX. 113 

Tremble. The Lion, shuddering, asks the Leopard : " Feelest thou 
The dread I feel, unknown before ? My voice refuses to roar, 

And in weak moans I speak to thee This night, 

Before the morning's dawn, the Eagle called to the Vulture, 

60 The Raven called to the Hawk, I heard from my forests black 
Saying : Let us go up, for soon I smell, upon the wind, 
A terror coming from the south. The Eagle and Hawk fled away 
At dawn, and ere the sun arose, the Raven and Vulture followed. 
Let us flee also to the north." They fled. The Sons of Men 

63 Saw them depart in dismal droves. The trumpets sounded loud, 
And all the Sons of Eternity descended into Beulah. 

In the fierce flames the limbs of Mystery lay consuming, with howling 
And deep despair. Rattling go up the flames around the synagogue 
Of Satan. Loud the serpent Ore raged through his writhing folds. 

70 The tree of Mystery burned up in folding flames. 

Blood issued out in rushing volumes, pouring in whirlpools fierce, 
From out the flood-gates of the tree. The gates are burst, downpouring 
The torrents black upon the earth. The blood pours down incessant. 
Kings in their palaces lie drowned. Shepherds, their flocks and tents, 

75 Roll down the mountains in black torrents. Cities, villages, 

High spires and castles drowned in the black deluge ; shoal on shoal 
Float the dead carcases of men and beasts, driven to and fro on flames 
Of foaming blood beneath the black incessant sky, till all 
Mystery's tyrants are cut off, and not one left on earth. 

80 And when all tyranny was cut off from the face of the earth, 
Around the dragon form of Urizen, and round his strong form, 
The flames rolling intense abroad through the wide universe, 
Began to enter the Holy City. Entering the dismal clouds, 
The furious lightnings break their way. The wild flames rushing up, 

83 The bloody deluge, living flames, winged with intellect 

And reason. Round the earth they march in order, flame by flame. 
Issuing from the clotted gore, and from the hollow den, 
Start forth the trembling millions into flames of mental fire, 
Bathing their limbs in the bright visions of Eternity. 



114 M'.HT IX. 

90 Beyond this universal confusion, beyond the remotest pole, 
Where their vortexes began to operate, there stands 
A horrible rock far in the north. It was forsaken when 
Urizen gave the horses of light into the hands of Luvah. 
On this rock lay the faded head of the Eternal Man, 

95 Enwrapt round with weeds of death, pale, cold in sorrow and woe, 
He lifts the blue lamps of his eyes, and cries with heavenly voice. 
Bowing his head over the consuming universe, he cries : 

Oh, weakness ! Oh, weariness ! Oh, war within my members ! 
My sons exiled from my breast, pass to and fro before me. 

100 jy birds are silent in my hills, flocks die beneath my branches. 
My tents are fallen, my trumpets and the sweet sound of my harps 
Is silent on my clouded hills that belch forth storms and fires. 
My milk of cows, and honey of bees, and fruit of golden harvest 
Are gathered in the scorching heat and in the driving rain. 

105 j^y r obe is turned to confusion, and my bright gold to stone. 
Where once I sat, I weary walk in misery and pain, 
For from within my withered breast grown narrow with my woes 
The corn is turned to thistles and the apples into poison ; 
The birds of song to murderous crows, my joys to bitter groans ; 

110 The voices of children in my tents to cries of helpless infants, 
And all exiled from the face of light and shine of morning, 
In this dark world, a narrow house, I wander up and down. 
I hear Mystery breathing in the flames of consummation. 
When shall the man of future times become as in days of old ? 

115 Oh, weary life ! Why sit I here and give up all my powers 

To indolence, to the night of death, when indolence and mourning 
Sit hovering over my dark threshold ? Though I arise, look ont 
And scorn the war within my members, yet my heart is weak 
And my head faint. Yet I will look again into the morning. 

120 Whence is this sound of rage of men drinking each other's blood ; 

Drunk with the smoking gore, and red, but not with nourishing wine ? 

The Eternal Man sat on the rock and cried with awful voice ; 






NIGHT IX. 115 

Oh, Prince of Light, where art thou ? 1 behold thee not as once 
In these eternal fields, in clouds of morning stepping forth 

125 With harps and songs, when bright Ahania sang before thy face, 
And all thy sons and daughters gathered round thy ample table. 
See you not all this racking furious confusion ? 

Come forth from the slumbers of thy cold abstraction. Come forth, 
Arise into eternal births. Shake off thy cold repose, 

130 Schoolmaster of our souls, great opposer of change, arise, 
That the eternal worlds may see thy face in peace and joy, 
That thou, dread form of certainty, may'st sit in town and village, 
While little children play around thy feet in gentle awe, 
Fearing thy frown, loving thy smile. Oh ! Urizen, Prince of Light, 

135 He called. The deep buried his voice, and answer none returned. 

Then wrath burst round. The Eternal Man was wrath again. He 
cried : 

Arise, oh ! thou strong form of Death, oh ! Dragon of the deeps, 
Lie down before my feet, oh ! Dragon, let Urizen arise. 
Oh ! how could'st thou deform those beautiful proportions 

140 Of life and person ; for as the person, so is his life proportioned. 
Let Luvah rage in the dark deep, even to consummation, 
For if thou feedest not his rage it will subdue in peace. 
But if thou darest, obstinate, refuse my stern behest, 
Thy crown and sceptre I will seize, and regulate all thy members 

145 In stern severity, and cast thee out into the indefinite 

Where nothing lives, there to wander, and if thou returnest weary, 
Weeping, at the threshold of existence, I will steel my heart 
Against thee to Eternity, and never receive thee more. 
Thy self-destroying, beast-formed science shall be thy eternal lot. 

iso My anger against thee is greater than against this Luvah, 
For war is energy enslaved, but thy religion, 
First author of this war, and the destruction of honest mind 
Into confused perturbation, and strife, and horror, and pride, 
In a deceit so detestable, that I will cast thee out 

8* 



116 NIGHT IX. 

155 If thou repentest not, and leave thee as a rotten branch to burn, 
With Mystery the harlot, and with Satan for ever and ever. 
Error can never be redeemed in all Eternity 
But sin, even Rahab, is redeemed in blood and fury, and jealousy, 
That line of blood that stretches across the windows of the morning, 

160 Redeemed from Error's power, wake, thou Dragon of the Deep. 

Urizen wept in the dark deep, anxious his scaly form 
To re-assume the Human and he wept in the dark deep, 
Saying : Oh ! that I had never drank the wine or eat the bread 
Of dark mortality, or cast my eyes into futurity, nor turned 

166 ^fy back, darkening the present, clouding with a cloud, 

And building arches high, and cities, turrets, towers and domes, 
Whose smoke destroyed the pleasant garden, and whose running 

kennels 

Choked the bright rivers ; burdening with my ships the angry deep ; 
Through chaos seeking for delight, and in spaces remote 

170 Seeking the eternal, which is always present to the wise ; 

Seeking for pleasure, which, unsought, falls round the infant's path, 
And on the fleeces of mild flocks who neither care nor labour ; 
But I, the labourer of ages, whose unwearied hands 
Are thus deformed with hardness, with the sword and with the spear, 

175 And with the chisel and the mallet I, whose labours vast 
Order the nations, separating family by family, 
Alone enjoying not. I alone in misery supreme, 
Ungratified, give all my joy unto this Luvah and Vala, 
Then go to dark Futurity. I will cast thee out from these 

180 Heavens of my brain, nor will I look on dark futurity more. 
I cast futurity away, and turn my back upon that void, 
Which I have made, for, lo ! Futurity is in this moment. 
Let Ore consume, let Tharmas rage, let dark Urthona give 
All strength to Los and Enitharmon, and let Los's self, enraged, 

185 Rend down this fabric, as a wall ruined, a family extinct. 

Rage, Ore ! rage, Tharmas ! Urizen no longer curbs your rage. 

So Urizen spoke, and shook his snows from off his shoulders, and arose 



NIGHT IX. 117 

As on a pyramid of mist, his white robes scattering 

The fleecy white renewed. He shook his aged mantle off 

190 Into the fires, then, glorious, bright, exulting in his joy, 
He sounding rose into the heavens in naked majesty, 
In radiant youth, when, lo ! like garlands in the eastern sky 
When vocal May comes dancing from the East, Ahania came, 
Exulting in her flight. As when a bubble rises up 

195 On to the surface of a lake, Ahania rose in joy. 

Excess of joy is worse than grief. Her heart beat high ; her blood 
Burst its bright vessels : she fell down dead at the feet of Urizen, 
Outstretched, a smiling corse. They buried her in a silent cave. 
Urizen dropped a tear. The Eternal Man darkened with sorrow. 

200 The three daughters of Urizen guard Ahania's death-couch ; 
Raging from the confusion, in tears and howling and despair, 
Calling upon their father's name, upon their father dark. 

And the Eternal man said, Hear my words, Prince of Light. 
Behold Jerusalem, in whose bosom the Lamb of God 

205 Is seen ; though slain before her gates, he self -renewed remains 
Eternal, and I through him awake from death's dark vale. 
The times revolve. The time is coming when all these delights 
Shall be renewed, and all these elements that now consume 
Shall re-flourish. Then bright Ahania shall awake from death, 

210 A glorious vision to thine eyes, a self -renewing vision, 

The spring the summer to be thine. Then sleep the wintry days 
In silken garments, spun by her own hands against her funeral. 
The winter thou shalt plough and lay thy stores into thy barns, 
Expecting to receive Ahania in the spring with joy. 

215 Immortal thou, regenerate she, and all the lovely sex 

From her shall learn obedience and prepare a wintry grave, 
That spring may see them rise in tenfold joy and sweet delight. 
Thus shall the female also live the life of Eternity 
Because the Lamb of God creates himself a bride and wife, 

220 That we his children evermore may live in Jerusalem, 



118 NIGHT 11. 

Which now desccndcth out of heaven, a city, yet a woman. 
Mother of myriads redeemed and born in her spiritual palaces 
By a new spiritual birth regenerated from death. 
Urizen said : I have erred and my error remains with me. 
225 What chain encompasses ? In what rock is the river of light confined 
That issues forth in the morning by measure and in the evening by 

carefulness ? 

Where shall we take our stand to view the infinite and unbounded ? 
And where our human feet, for, lo ! our eyes are in the heavens. 

He ceased, for, riven link from link, the bursting universe exploding, 

830 All things revived flew from their centres, rattling bones 

To bones join, shaking, convulsed, the shivering clay breathes. 
Each speck of dust, to the Earth's centre, nestles round and round 
In pangs of an Eternal Birth, in torment, awe, and fear. 
All spirits deceased, let loose from reptile prisons, come in shoals. 

233 Wild furies from the Tiger's brain and from the Lion's eyes, 

And from the Ox and Ass come moping terrors. From the Eagle 
And Raven, numerous as the leaves of autumn, every species 
Flock to the trumpet, fluttering over the sides of the grave and crying 
In the fierce wind round the heavy rocks and mountains filled with 
groans. 

240 On rifted rocks, suspended in the air by inward fires, 

Many a woeful company ; and many on clouds and waters, 
Fathers, friends, and mothers, infants, kings, and warriors, 
Priests and chained captives meet together in horrible fear, 
And every one of the dead appears as he had lived before ; 

245 And all the marks remain of the slave's scourge and tyrant's crown, 
And of the priest's overgorged abdomen, and of the merchant's thin 
Sinewy deceptions, and of the warrior's all-braving thoughtlessness, 
In lineaments too extended and in bones too straight and long. 
They show their wounds : they accuse : they seize the oppressor ; 
howlings began 

230 On the golden Palace ; songs of joy on the desert. The cold babe 
Stands in the furious air ; he cries. The children of six thousand years 



NIGHT it. He) 

Who died in infancy rage furious, a mighty multitude rage furious, 
Naked and pale. Standing in the expecting air to be delivered, 
Rend limb from limb the warrior, the tyrant, reuniting in pain. 

255 The furious wind still rends around. They listen not to entreaty, 
They view the flames red rolling on through the wide universe 
From the dark jaws of death beneath and desolate shores remote, 
These covering vaults of heaven and these breathing globes of earth. 
One planet calls to another and one star inquires of another : 

260 What flames are these, coming from the south ? What noise, what 

dreadful rout 

As of a battle in the heavens ! Hark ! Heard you not the trumpet 
As of fierce battle ? While they spoke, the flames come intense roaring. 
They see him whom they have pierced, they wail because of him, 
They magnify themselves no more against Jerusalem, nor 

265 Against her little ones. The innocent accused before the judges 

Shines with immortal glory. Trembling, the judge springs from his 

throne, 

Hiding his face in the dust beneath the prisoner's feet and saying : 
Brother of Jesus, what have I done ? Entreat thy Lord for me : 
Perhaps I may be forgiven. While he speaks the flames roll on 

270 And after the flames appears the cloud of the Son of Man 
Descending from Jerusalem with power and great glory. 
All nations look up to the cloud and behold Him who was crucified. 
The prisoner answers : You scourged my father to death before my face 
When I stood bound with cords and heavy chains. Your hypocrisy 

276 Shall now avail you nought. So saying he dashed him with his foot. 

The cloud is Blood, dazzling upon the heavens, and in the cloud 
Above, upon its volumes, is beheld a throne, as a pavement 
Of precious stones, surrounded by twenty-four venerable patriarchs, 
And these again surrounded by four Wonders of the Almighty 
280 Incomprehensible, pervading all, within and round about 

Fourfold, each in the other reflected. They are named Lifes in 

Eternity 

Four starry universes, going forward from Eternity to Eternity. 
And the Fallen Man who was arisen upon the Rock of Ages, 



120 NIGHT IX. 

And Urizen, arose with him, walking through all the flames 
888 To meet the Lord, coming to Judgment, but the flames repelled them. 
Still to the Rock, in vain, they strove to enter the consummation 
Together, for the redeemed Man could not enter the consummation. 

Then seized the sons of Urizen the plough. They polished it 
From rust of ages. All its ornaments of gold, silver and ivory, 

290 Re-shone across the field immense when all the nations 

Darkened, like mould, in the divided furrows where the weed 
Triumphs in its own destruction. They took down the harness 
From the blue walls of heaven, starry, jingling, ornamented 
With beautiful art, the study of Angels, the workmanship of 
Demons, 

285 When Heaven and Hell in emulation strove in the spirits of glory. 
The noise of rural works resounded through the heavens of heavens, 
The horse neighs from the battle, the wild bulls from the sultry waste, 
The tigers from the forests, the lions from the sandy deserts. 
They sing ; they seize the instruments of harmony ; they throw away 

300 The spear, the bow, the gun, the mortar. They level the fortifications. 
They beat the iron engines of destruction into wedges. 
They give them to Urthona's sons. Ringing the hammers sound 
In dens of death to forge the spade, the mattock, and the axe, 
The heavy roller to break the clods, to pass over the nations. 

305 The Sons of Urizen shout : their father rose. The Eternal horses 
Harnessed, they call to Urizen. The heavens move at their call. 
The limbs of Urizen shone with ardour. He laid his hand on the 

plough, 

Through dismal darkness drove the plough of ages over cities 
And all their villages ; over mountains, and all their valleys ; 
310 Over caves and caverns of the dead, over the planets, 

And over the void spaces ; over sun and moon, and star and con- 
stellation. 

Then Urizen commanded and they brought the seed of Men. 
The trembling souls of all the dead stood before Urizen, 



NIGHT IX. 121 

Weak, wailing in the troubled air, East, West, and North and South. 
315 He turned the horses loose and laid the plough in the northern corner 

Of the wide universal field, then stepped forth into the immense. 

Then he began to sow the seed. He girded round his loins 

With a bright girdle, and his skirt, filled with immortal souls. 

Howling and wailing fly the souls from Urizen's strong hand, 
20 For from the hand of Urizen the myriads fall like stars 

Into their own appointed places, driven back by the winds. 

The naked warriors rush together down to the sea-shore. 

They are become like wintry flocks, like forests stripped of leaves, 

The kings and princes of the earth cry with a feeble cry, 
325 Driven on the unproducing sands, and on the hardened rocks. 

And all the while the flames of Ore follow the venturous feet 
Of Urizen, and all the while the trump of Tharmas sounds. 
Weeping and wailing fly the souls from Urizen's strong hands. 
The daughters of Urizen stand with cups and measures of strong wine 

330 Immense upon the heavens with bread and delicate repasts. 
Then follows the golden harrow in the midst of mental fires, 
To ravishing melody of flutes, and harps, and softest voice. 
The seed is harrowed in while flames heal the black mould and cause 
The human harvest to begin. Toward the south first sprang 

333 The myriads, and in silent fear they look out of their graves. 

Then Urizen sits down to rest, and all his wearied sons 

Take their repose on beds. They drink, they sing, they view the 

flames 

Of Ore. In joy they view the human harvest springing up. 
A time they give to sweet repose, till all the harvest is ripe. 

340 And lo ! like harvest moon, Ahania cast off her dark clothes 
She folded them up in care, in silence, and her brightening limbs 
Bathed in the clear spring of the rock. Then from her darksome cave 
Issued in majesty divine. Urizen rose from his couch 
On wings of tenfold joy, clapping his hands, his radiant wings 



122 NIGHT IX. 

848 In the immense. As when the snn dances upon the mountains 

A shout of jubilee in lovely notes responds from daughter to daughter, 
From son to son, as if the stars beaming innumerable 
Through night, should sing soft warbling, filling the earth and heaven, 
And bright Ahania took her seat by Urizen in songs and joy. 

350 The Eternal Man also sat down upon the couches of Beulah, 
Sorrowful that he could not put off his newly risen body 
In mental flames. The flames refused, they drove him back to Beulah. 
His body was redeemed to be permanent through mercy Divine. 

And now fierce Ore had quite consumed himself in mental flames, 

866 Expending all his energy against the fuel of fire. 

The Regenerate Man stooped his holy head over the universe, and in 
His holy hands received the flaming demon and dimness of smoke 
And gave him to Urizen's hands. The immortal frowned, saying, 
Luvah and Vala, henceforth you are servants ; obey and live. 

360 You shall forget your former state. Return and love in peace, 
Into your place, the place of seed, not in the brain or heart. 
If Gods combine against Man setting their dominion above 
The Human Form Divine, thrown down from their high station 
In the eternal heavens of Human Imagination, buried beneath 

3(55 In dark oblivion, with incessant pangs, ages on ages, 

In enmity and war first weakened, then in stern repentance 
They must renew their brightness, and their disorganized functions 
Again reorganize till they resume the image of the human, 
Co-operating in the bliss of Man, obeying his will, 

370 Servants to the infinite and eternal of the human form. 

Luvah and Vala descended and entered the gate of dark Urthoua 
And walked from the hands of Urizen in the shadow of Vala's garden, 
Where the impressions of despair and hope for ever vegetate 
In flowers and fruits, fishes and birds, and beasts and clouds and waters. 
876 The land of doubts and shadows, sweet delusions, unformed hopes, 
They saw no more, the terrible confusions of the wracking universe 
They heard not, saw not, felt not the horrible confusion, 



NIGHT IX. 123 

For in their orbed senses within closed up they wandered at will. 
And those upon the couches viewed them in the dreams of Beulah, 
380 As they reposed from the terrible wide universal harvest. 
Invisible Luvah in bright clouds hovered over Vala's head, 
And thus their ancient golden age renewed, for Luvah spoke 
With voice mild from his golden cloud upon the breath of morning. 

Come forth, oh ! Yala, from the grass and from the silent dew; 
383 Rise from the dews of death, for the Eternal Man is risen. 

She rises among flowers and looks toward the eastern clearness, 

She walks, yea runs, her feet are winged on the top of the bending grass, 

Her garments rejoice in the vocal winds, and her hair glistens with dew. 

She answers thus : Whose voice is this, the voice of the nourishing air 
390 In the spirit of the morning, awaking the soul from its grassy bed ? 

Where dost thou dwell ? For thee I seek, and were it not but for thee 

I must have slept eternally, nor felt the dews of the morning. 

Look how the opening dawn advances with local harmony. 

Look how the beams foreshow the rising of the glorious power. 
395 The sun is thine. He goeth forth in his majestic brightness. 

Oh, thou awaking voice that callest ! And who shall answer thee ? 

Where dost thou flee, oh ! fair one ? Where dost thou seek thy happy 
place 

To yonder brightness ? There I haste, for since I came from thence 

I must have slept eternally nor have felt the dew of morning. 

400 Eternally thou must have slept nor have felt the morning dew. 
But for yon nourishing sun, 'tis that by which thou art arisen. 
The birds adore the sun : the beasts rise up and play in his beams, 
And every flower and every leaf rejoices in his light, 
Then, oh ! thou fair one, sit thee down, for thou art as the grass, 

405 Thou risest in the dew of morning and at night art folded up. 

Alas ! I am but as a flower ; then will I sit me down, 

Then will I weep, then I'll complain, and sigh for immortality, 



124 NIGHT IX. 

And chide my maker, thee, oh ! sun, that raisedst me to fall. 
So saying she sat down and wept beneath the apple-trees. 

no Oh ! be thou blotted out, oh ! sun, that raisedst me to trouble, 
That gavest me a heart to crave, that raisedst me, thy phantom, 
To feel thy heart, and see thy light, and wander here alone, 
Hopeless, if I am like the grass, and so shall pass away. 

Rise, sluggish soul. Why sit'st thou here ? Why dost thou sit and 

weep? 

415 Yon sun shall wax old and decay, but thou shalt ever flourish. 
The fruit shall ripen and fall down, the flowers consume away, 
But thou shalt still survive. Arise and dry thy dewy tears. 

Ah, shall I still survive ? Whence came that sweet and comforting 
voice ? 

And whence that voice of sorrow ? Oh ! sun, thou'rt nothing now to me. 
420 Go on thy course rejoicing and let us both rejoice together. 

I walk among his flocks and hear the bleeting of his lambs. 

Oh ! that I could behold his face and follow his pure feet. 

I walk by the footsteps of his flocks. Come hither, tender flocks. 

Can you converse with a pure soul that seeketh for her maker ? 
425 You answer not. Then am I set your mistress in the garden. 

I'll watch you and attend your footsteps. You are not like the birds 

That sing and fly in the bright air : but you do lick my feet 

And let me touch your woolly backs and follow me as I sing. 

For in my bosom a new song arises to the Lord, 
430 Rise up, oh ! sun, most glorious minister of light and day. 

Flow on, ye gentle airs, and bear the voice of my rejoicing. 

Wave freshly yon clear water flowers around the tender grass. 

Follow me, oh ! my flocks, and hear me sing my rapturous song. 

I will cause my voice to be heard on the clouds that gather in the sun. 
435 I will call ; and who shall answer me ? I will sing ; who shall reply ? 

For from my pleasant hills behold the living, living spring, 

Running among my green pastures, delighting among my trees. 



NIGHT IX. 125 

I am not here alone : my flocks, you are my brethren. 

And you, oh ! birds that sing and adorn the sky, you are my sisters. 
440 I sing and you reply to my song ; I rejoice, and you are glad. 

Follow me, oh ! my flocks ; we will now descend into the valley. 

Oh, how delicious are the grapes, flourishing in the sun ! 

How clear the spring of the rock, running among the golden sand ! 

How cool the breezes of the valley, and the arms of the branching trees ! 
445 Cover us from the sun. Come near and let us sit in the shade. 

My Luvah here hath placed me in a green and pleasant land 

And given me fruits and pleasant waters, and warm hills, and cool 
valleys. 

Here will I build myself a house, and here call on his name. 

Then I'll return when I am weary and take my pleasant rest. 

450 So spoke the sinless soul and laid her head in the snowy fleece 
Of a curled ram, who stretched himself, laid down in sleep beside, 
And soft sleep fell upon her eyelids in the silent noon of day. 

Then Luvah passed by, and looked, and saw the sinless soul, 
And said : Let a pleasant house arise to be a dwelling-place 
455 Of this immortal spirit growing in lower Paradise. 

He spoke, and pillars were builded, and walls, as white as ivory. 
The grass she slept upon was paved with pavement as of pearl. 
Beneath her rose a downy bed, and a ceiling covered all. 

Vala awoke. When in the pleasant gates of sleep I entered 
460 I saw my Luvah like a spirit stand in the bright air. 

Around him stood spirits like me, who reared me a bright house, 
And here I see the house remain in my most pleasant world. 
My Luvah smiled. I kneeled down. He laid his hand on my head, 
And when he laid his hand upon me from the gates of sleep I came 
465 Into this bodily house to tend my flocks in my pleasant garden. 

So saying, she arose and walked around her beautiful house, 
And then from her white door she looked to see her bleating lambs, 
But her flocks were gone up from beneath the trees into the hills. 
J see the hand that leadeth me doth also lead my flocks. 



126 NIGHT IX. 

*W She went to her flocks, and turned oft to sec her shining house. 

She stooped to drink of the clear spring, and eat the grapes and apples. 
She bore the fruits in her lap. She gathered flowers for her bosom. 
She called to her flocks, saying often, Follow me, oh ! my Flocks. 
They followed her to the silent valley beneath the spreading trees, 

* 7a And on the river's margin she ungirded her golden girdle. 

She stood in the river and viewed herself within the wavy glass, 
And her bright hair was met with waters. She rose from the river, 
And as she rose her eyes were opened to the world of waters, 
And saw Tharmas sitting upon the rocks beside the weary sea. 

480 He stroked the water from his beard and mourned through the summer 
valley. 

And Vala stood on the rocks of Tharmas and heard the mournful voice : 

Oh ! Enion, my weary head is in the bed of death, 

For weeds of death have wrapped around my limbs in the hoary deeps. 

I sit in the place of shells and mourn, and thou art closed in clouds. 
488 When will the time of clouds be past, and the dismal night of Tharmas ? 

Arise, oh ! Enion, arise and smile upon my head, 

As thou dost smile upon the barren mountains, and they rejoice. 

When wilt thou smile on Tharmas, oh ! thou bringer of golden day ? 

Arise, oh ! Enion, arise, for lo ! I have calmed my seas. 

480 So saying, his faint head he laid upon the oozy rock, 

And darkness covered all the deep. The light of Enion faded, 
Like a faint flame quivering upon the surface of the darkness. 

Then Vala lifted up her hands to heaven to call on Enion. 
She called, but none could answer her, and the echoes her voice returned. 
485 Where is the voice of God that called me from the silent dew ? 

Where is the Lord of Vala ? Dost thou hide in clefts of the rock ? 
Why should'st thou hide thyself from Vala, from the soul that wanders 
desolate ? 

She ceased, and light beamed round her like the glory of the morning. 
And she arose out of the river and girded her golden girdle, 



NIGHT IX. 127 

800 And now her feet step on the grassy bosom of the ground 

Among her flocks. She turned her eyes toward her pleasant house. 
She saw in the doorway beneath the trees two little children playing. 
She drew near to her house, and her flocks followed in her footsteps. 
The children clung around her knees. She embraced them and wept, 

605 Thou, little boy, art Tharmas, and thou, bright girl, Enion. 

How are ye thus renewed and brought into the garden of Vala ? 
She embraced them in tears, till the sun descended the western hills, 
And then she entered her bright house, leading her mighty children. 
And when night came, her flocks laid round the house beneath the trees. 

510 She laid the children on the beds which she saw prepared in the house, 
Then last, herself, laid down, and closed her eyelids in soft slumbers. 
And in the morning, when the sun arose in the crystal sky, 
Vala awoke, and called her children from their gentle slumbers : 
Awake, oh ! Enion, awake, and let thine immortal eyes 

515 Enlighten all the crystal house of Vala ! Awake ! awake ! 
Awake, Tharmas ! Awake, awake, thou child of many tears. 
Open the orbs of thy blue eyes and smile upon my gardens. 

The children awoke and smiled on Vala. She kneeled by the golden 

couch. 

She pressed them to her bosom, and her pearly tears dropped down. 
520 Oh, my sweet children ! Enion, let Tharmas kiss thy cheek. 
Why dost thou turn thyself away from his sweet watery eyes ? 
Tharmas, henceforth in Vala's bosom thou shalt find sweet peace. 
Oh, bless the lovely eyes of Tharmas and the eyes of Enion ! 

They rose ; they went out wandering, sometimes together, sometimes 

alone. 

525 Why weep'st thou, Tharmas, child of tears, in the bright house of joy ? 
Doth Enion avoid the sight of thy blue heavenly eyes ? 
And dost thou wander with my lambs, and wet their innocent faces 
With thy bright tears, because the steps of Enion are in the gardens f 
Arise, sweet boy, and let us follow the path of Enion. 



128 NIGHT IX. 

580 So saying, they went down into the garden among the fruits, 
And Enion sang among the flowers that grew among the fruits, 
And Vala said : Go, Tharmas ; weep not, go to Enion. 

And he said : Oh ! Vala, I am sick. All this garden of pleasure 
Swims like a dream before my eyes. But the sweet smiling fruit 
838 Revives me to new death. I fade, even as a water-lily 
In the sun's heat, till in the night, on the couch of Enion, 
I drink new life, and feel the breath of sleeping Enion. 
But in the morning she arises to avoid my eyes, 
Then my loins fade, and in the house I sit me down and weep. 

840 Cheer up thy countenance, bright boy, and go to Enion. 
Tell her that Vala waits her in the shadows of her garden. 
He went with timid steps, and Enion, like the ruddy morn 
When infant spring appears in swelling buds and opening flowers, 
Behind her veil withdraws ; so Enion turned her modest head. 

848 But Tharmas spoke. Vala seeks thee, sweet Enion, in the shades. 

Follow the steps of Tharmas, oh ! though brightness of the garden. 

He took her hand reluctant. She followed in infant doubts. 

There in eternal childhood, straying among Vala's flocks, 

In infant sorrow and joy alternate, Enion and Tharmas play'd 
550 Bound Vala, in the garden of Vala, and by her river's margin. 

They are the shadows of Tharmas and Enion in Vala's world. 

And the sleepers who rested from their harvest work beheld these 

visions. 

Then were the sleepers entertained upon the couches of Beulah, 
When Luvah and Vala were closed up in their world of shadowy forms. 
555 Darkness was all beneath the heaven : only a little light, 

Such as glows out from sleeping spirits, awoke in the deeps beneath. 

As when a wind sweeps over a cornfield the noise of souls 

Through all the immense, borne down by clouds swagging in autumnal 

heat, 
Muttering along from heaven to heaven, hoarse roll the human forms 



NIGHT IX. 129 

560 Beneath thick clouds, the dreadful lightnings burst and thunders roll, 
Down pour the torrent floods from heaven on all the human harvest. 

Then Urizen, sitting at his repose on beds in the bright south, 

Cried, " Times are ended." He exulted, he arose in joy. 

He poured his light, and all his sons and daughters poured their light 

563 To exhale the spirits of Luvah and Vala through the atmosphere. 
And Luvah and Vala saw the light. Their spirits soon exhaled 
In all their ancient innocence. The floods depart, the clouds 
Dissipate, or sink into the sea of Tharmas. Luvah sat 
Alone on the bright heavens in peace. The spirits of men beneath 

570 Cried out to be delivered, and the spirit of Luvah wept 

Over the human harvest, and over Vala, the sweet wanderer. 
In pain the human harvest waved in horrible groans of woe. 
The universal groan went up, the Eternal Man was darkened. 

Then Urizen arose and took his sickle in his hand. 

575 There is a brazen sickle, and a sceptre of iron hid 
Deep in the south, guarded by a few solitary stars. 
This sickle Urizen took ; the scythe his sons embraced, 
And went forth and began to reap, and all his joyful sons 
Reaped the wide universe, and bound in sheaves a wondrous harvest. 

580 They took them into the wide barn with loud rejoicings, and triumphs 
Of flute and harp and drum and trumpet, horn and clarion. 
The feast was spread in the bright south ; and the Regenerated Man 
Sat at the feast rejoicing, and the wine of Eternity 
Was served round by the flames of Luvah all day and all the night. 

585 And when morning began to dawn upon the distant hills, 

A whirlwind rose up in the centre, and in the whirlwind a shriek. 
And in the shriek a rattling of bones, and in the rattling of bones 
A dolorous groan, and from the dolorous groan in tears, 
Rose Enion like a gentle light, and Enion spoke, saying : 

S9 Oh ! Dream of Death, the human form dissolving, compassed 

By beasts and worms and creeping things, and darkness and despair. 



130 NIGHT IX. 

The clouds fall off from my wot brow, the dust from my cold limbs, 

Into the sea of Tharmas. Soon renewed, a golden Moth 

I shall cast off my death-clothes and embrace Tharmas again. 

505 For, lo ! the winter melted away upon the distant hills, 

And all the black mould sings. She spoke to her infant race ; her milk 
Descends down on the land, the thirsty land drinks and rejoices. 
Wondering to behold the emmet, the grasshopper, the jointed worm. 
The roots shoot thick through solid rock, bursting their fibrous way. 

600 They cry out in the joys of existence, and the broad tree stems 

Rear on the mountains stem by stem. The scaly newt creeps forth 
From the stone, and from the rocky crevice springs the armed fly, 
The spider and the bat burst from the hardened slime, crying 
To one another : What are we H And whence is our delight ? 

605 Lo ! the little moss begins to spring, and lo ! the tender weed 
Creeps round about our secret nest. Flocks brighten on the hills, 
Herds throng up through the valley, and the wild beasts fill the woods. 

Joy thrilled through all the furious forms of Tharmas, humanizing. 
Mild he embraced her whom he sought. He raised her through the 

heavens, 

610 Sounding his trumpet to awake the dead. On high he soared 
O'er ruined worlds, the misty tomb of the Eternal Prophet. 

Then the Eternal Man arose. He welcomed them to the feast. 

The feast was spread in the bright south ; and the Eternal Man 

Sat at the feast rejoicing, and the wine of Eternity 
615 Was served round by the flames of Luvah all day and all the night. 

And many Eternal Men sat at the golden feast to see 

The female form now separate. They shuddered at the horrible thing 

Born for the sport and amusement of Man, soon to drink up his 
powers. 

They wept to see the shadow. They said to one another : This is sin. 
620 This is the vegetative world. They remember the days of old. 

And one of the Eternals spoke ; all was silent at the feast. 

Man is a worm renewed with joy, he seeks the caves of sleep 



NIGHT IX. 131 

Among the flowers of Beulah in his selfish cold repose, 
Forsaking brotherhood and universal love in selfish clay, 

625 Folding the pure wings of his mind, seeking the places dark, 
Abstracted from the roots of Nature then enclosed anew 
In walls of gold. We cast him like a seed into the earth 
Till times and spaces have passed over him. Duly every morn 
We visit him, covering with a veil the immortal seed. 

eso With windows from the inclement sky we cover him, and with walls 
And hearths protect the selfish terror, till divided all 
In families we see our shadows born, and thence we know 
That Man subsists by brotherhood and universal love. 
We fall on one another's necks, more closely we embrace, 

ess Not for ourselves, but for the Eternal Family we live. 
Man liveth not by self alone, but in his brother's face 
Each shall behold the Eternal Father and love and joy abound. 

So spoke the Eternal at the Feast. They embraced the new-born Man, 
Calling him Brother, image of the Eternal Father. They sat down 
640 At the immortal tables, sounding loud their instruments of joy, 
Calling the Morning into Beulah. The Eternal Man rejoiced. 
When Morning dawned the Eternals rose to labour in the vintage 
Beneath they saw their children, wondering inconceivably 
At the dark myriads in shadows in the worlds beneath. 

645 The Morning dawned. Urizen rose, and in his hand the flail 
Sounds on the floor ; heard terrible by all beneath the heavens. 
Dismal, loud, redounding, the nether floor shakes with the sound, 
And all the Nations were threshed out, and the stars threshed from 
their husks. 

Then Tharmas took the winnowing fan. The winnowing wind furious 
650 Above, veered round by violent whirlwind driven west and south, 
Tossed the Nations like chaff into the sea of Tharmas. 

Oh ! Mystery, fierce Tharmas cried, behold thy end is come ! 

Art thou she that made the Nations drunk with the cup of Religion ? 



132 N10HT IX. 

Go down, ye kings and counsellors and giant warriors, 
655 Go down into the depths ; go down and hide yourselves beneath. 

Go down with horse and chariots and trumpets of hoarse war. 

Lo ! how the pomp of Mystery goes down into the caves. 

Her great men howl and throw the dust, and rend their hoary hair. 

Her delicate women and children shriek upon the bitter wind, 
680 Spoiled of their beauty, their hair rent, their skin shrivelled up. 

Lo ! darkness covers the long pomp of banners on the wind, 

And black horses, and armed men, and miserable bound captives. 

Where shall the graves receive them all, and where shall be their 
place ? 

And who shall mourn for Mystery, who never loosed her captives ? 
668 Let the slave, grinding at the mill, run out into the field ; 

Let him look up into the heavens and laugh in the bright air. 

Let the enchained soul shut up in darkness and in sighing, 

Whose face has never seen a smile in thirty weary years. 

Rise and look out ; his chains are loose, his dungeon doors are open. 
670 And let his wife and children return from the oppressor's scourge. 

They look behind at every step and believe it is a dream. 

Are these the slaves that groan along the streets of Mystery ? 

Where are your bonds and task-masters ? Are these the prisoners ? 

Where are your chains ? Where are your tears ? Why do you look 

around ? 
876 If you are thirsty, there is the river ; go, bathe your parched limbs, 

And the good of all the land is before you, for Mystery is no more. 

Then all the slaves from every earth in the wide Universe 

Sing a new song, drowning confusion in its happy notes, 

While the flail of Urizen sounded loud, and the winnowing wind of 

Tharmas 
680 So loud and clear in the wide heavens, and the song that they sang, 

was this, 
Composed by an African Black from the little earth of Sotha : 

Aha ! Aha ! How came I here, in my sweet native land ? 
How came I here ? Methinks I am as I was in my youth, 



NIGHT IX. 133 

When in my father's house, in joy, I heard his cheering voice. 
685 Methinks I see his flocks and herds and feel my limbs renewed, 

And lo ! my brethren in their tents, and their little ones around them ! 

The song arose to the golden feast. The Eternal Man rejoiced. 
The Eternal Man said : Luvah, the vintage is ripe. Arise ! 
The sons of Urizen shall gather the vintage with sharp hooks, 

690 And all thy sons, oh ! Luvah, bear away the families of earth. 
I hear the flail of Urizen. His barns are full. No room 
Remains, and in the vineyards stand the abounding sheaves beneath 
The falling grapes that odorous burst upon the winds. Arise ! 
My flocks and herds trample the corn, my cattle browse upon 

695 The ripe clusters. The shepherds shout for Luvah, Prince of Love. 
Let the Bulls of Luvah tread the corn and draw the loaded waggon 
Into the barn while children glean the ears around the door. 
Then shall they lift their innocent hands and stroke his furious nose, 
And he shall lick the little girl's white neck, and on her head 

700 Scatter the perfumes of his breath, while from his mountains high 
The lion of terror shall come down, and bending his bright mane, 
And crouching at her side shall eat from the curly boy's white lap 
His golden food, and in the evening sleep before the door. 

Attempting to be more than man we become less, said Luvah, 
705 As he arose from the bright feast, drunk with the wine of ages. 
His crown of thorns fell from his head, he hung his living lyre 
Behind the seat of the Eternal Man, and took his way, 
Sounding the song of Los, descending to the vineyards bright. 
His sons, arising from the feast with golden baskets, follow, 
710 A fiery train, as when the Sun sings in the ripe vineyards. 

Then Luvah stood before the wine-press. All his fiery sons 
Brought up the loaded waggons with shoutings : ramping tigers play 
In the jingling traces ; furious lions sound the song of joy 
To the golden wheels circling upon the pavement of heaven, and all 
715 The villages of Luvah rising ; the golden tiles of the villages 



134 NIGHT IX. 

Reply to violins and tabors, to the pipe, flute, lyre, and cymbal. 
These fill the legions of Mystery with maddening confusion. 
Down, down, through the immense, with outcry, fury, and despair, 
Into the wine-presses of Luvah, howling, fall the clusters 
720 Of human families through the deep. The wine-presses are filled, 
The blood of life flowed plentiful ; odours of life arose 
All round the heavenly arches, and the odours sang this song : 

Terrible wine-presses of Luvah ! Oh, caverns of the grave ! 
How lovely the delights of those risen again from death ! 
725 Oh, trembling joy! Excess of joy is like excess of grief. 

So sang the human odours round the wine-presses of Luvah. 
But in the wine-presses is wailing, terror and despair. 
Forsaken of their elements they vanish and are no more 
No more but a desire of being, a ravening desire, 

730 Desiring like the hungry worm, and like the gaping grave. 

They plunge into the elements. The elements cast them forth, 
Or else consume their shadowy semblance ; but they, obstinate, 
Though framed for destruction, cry Oh, let us exist ! for 
This dreadful non-existence is worse than the pains of eternal birth : 

735 Eternal death who can endure ? Let us consume in fires, 
In waters stifling, or in air corroding, or in earth shut up : 
The pangs of eternal birth are better than the pangs of eternal death. 

How red the sons and daughters of Luvah ! How they tread the grapes, 
Laughing and shouting, drunk with odours ! Many fall overwearied : 

740 Drowned in the wine is many a youth and maiden. Those around 
Lay them on skins of tigers, or the leopard or wild ass, 
Till they revive, or bury in cool grots with lamentation. 
Bat in the wine-presses the human grapes sing not nor dance, 
They howl and writhe in shoals of torment and fierce flames consuming, 

746 In chains of iron and in dungeons circled with ceaseless fires, 

In pits and dens and shades of death, and shapes of torment and woe; 
The plates and the screws, and wracks, and saws, and cords, and fires, 
and floods ; 



NlGfif IX. 135 

The cruel joy of Luvah's daughters, lacerating with knives 
And whips their victims, and the deadly sport of Luvah's sons. 

750 Timbrels and violins sport round the wine-presses. The little seed, 
The sportive root, the earthworm, the snake-beetle, the wise emmet, 
Dance round the wine-presses of Luvah. The centipede is there, 
The ground spider with many eyes, the mole clothed with velvet, 
The earwig armed, the tender maggot, emblem of immortality ; 

755 The slow slug, the grasshopper that sings and laughs and drinks : 
The winter comes ; he folds his slender bones without a murmur. 
There is the nettle, that can sting with her soft down ; and there 
The indignant thistle, whose bitterness is bred in his milk, who lives 
On the contempt of his neighbours. There are all the idle weeds 

760 That creep about the obscure places, showing their various limbs 
Naked in all their beauty, dancing round the wine-presses. 
They dance around the dying, and they drink the howls and groans ; 
They catch the shrieks in cups of gold; they hand them to one another. 
These are the sports of love, the sweet delights of amorous play : 

765 Tears of the grape, the death-sweat of the cluster, the last sigh 
Of the mild youth who listens to the luring songs of Luvah. 

The Eternal Man darkened with sorrow, and a wintry mantle 
Covered the hills. He said Oh, Tharmas, rise ! and oh, Urthona ! 
Then Tharmas and Urthona rose from the golden feast, satiated 
770 With mirth and joy : Urthona, limping from his fall, on Tharmas leaned, 
In his right hand his hammer. Tharmas held his shepherd's crook 
Beset with gold, the ornaments formed by sons of Urizen. 

Then Enion, and Ahania, and Vala, and the wife of dark Urthona, 
Rose from the feast, with joy ascending, to their golden looms. 
775 Then the winged shuttle sang, the spindle, the distaff and reel 
Rang sweet the praise of industry through all the golden room. 
Heaven rang with winged exultation. All beneath howled loud, 
With tenfold rout and desolation roared the caverns beneath 
When the wide woof flowed down and when the Nations were gathered 
together. 



136 WIGHT ix. 

7SO Tharmas went down to the wine-presses, and beheld the sons and 

daughters 

Of Luvah quite exhausted with the labour and quite filled 
With new wine, that they began to torment one another and tread 
The weak. Luvah and Vala slept on the floor, o'erwearied. 

Urthona called his sons around when Tharmas called his sons 
785 Numerous. They took the wine, they separated the lees, 

And Luvah was put for dying on the ground by the sons of Tharmas 

and Urthona. 

They formed the heaven of sweetest wood, of gold and silver and ivory, 
Of glass and precious stones. They loaded all the waggons of heaven 
And took away the wine of ages, with solemn songs and joy. 

790 Luvah and Vala awoke, and all the sons and daughters of Luvah 
Awoke. They wept to one another. They re-ascended 
To the Eternal Man. In woe he cast them wailing into 
The world of shadows, through the air, till winter is come and gone. 
But the human wine stood wondering in all these delightful expanses, 

796 The elements subsided, the heavens rolled on with vocal harmony. 

Then Los, who is Urthona, rose in all his regenerate power. 
The sea that rolled and foamed with darkness and the shadow of death 
Vomited out and gave up all. The floods lift up their hands, 
Singing and shrieking to the Man. They bow their hoary heads, 
800 And murmuring in their channels flow and circle round his feet. 

Then dark Urthona took the corn out of the stores of Urizen ; 

He ground it in his rumbling mills, terrible the distress 

Of all the Nations of the Earth, ground in the mills of Urthona. 

In his hand Tharmas takes the storms : he turns the whirlwinds loose 
805 Upon the wheels. The starry seas roar at his dread command, 
And, eddying fierce, rejoice in the fierce agitation of the wheels 
Of dark Urthona. Thundering earthquakes, fierce water-floods, 
Rejoice to one another. Loud their voices shake the abyss, 



KIGHT IX. 137 

Their dread forms tending the dire mills. The grey hoar-frost was 

there, 

810 And his pale wife the aged snow. They watch over the fires, 
They build the ovens of Urthona. Nature in darkness groans, 
And Men are bound to sullen contemplation all the night. 
Restless they turn on beds of sorrow, in their inmost brain 
Feeling the crushing wheels : they rise, they write the bitter words 
815 Of stern Philosophy, and knead the bread of Knowledge with tears 
and groans. 

Such are the works of dark Urthona. Tharmas sifts the corn. 
Urthona made the bread of ages, and he placed it 
In golden and in silver baskets, in heavens of precious stone, 
And then took his repose in winter, in the night of time. 

820 The sun has left his blackness and has found a fresher morning, 
And the mild moon rejoices in the clear and cloudless night, 
And Man walks forth from midst of fires : the evil is all consumed. 
His eyes behold the angelic spheres among the night and day ; 
The stars consumed, like a lamp blown out, and in their stead, behold ! 

825 One earth one sea beneath ; nor erring globes wander, but stars 
Of fire rise up nightly from the ocean ; and one sun 
Each morning, like a new-born May, issues with songs of joy, 
Calling the ploughman to his labour, the shepherd to his rest. 
He wakes upon the eternal mountains, raising his heavenly voice 

830 Conversing with the animal forms of wisdom night and day, 
That, risen from the sea of fire, renewed walk over the earth ; 
For Tharmas brought his flocks upon the hills, and in the vales 
Around the Eternal Man's bright tent the little children play 
Among the woolly flocks. The hammer of Urthona sounds 

835 In the deep caves beneath, his limbs renewed ; the lions roar 
Around the furnaces, and in evening sport upon the plains. 
They raise their faces from the earth, conversing with the Man : 

How is it we have walked through fire and yet are not consumed ? 



138 NIOHT IX. 

How is it that all things are changed, even as in ancient times ? 
840 The sun arises from his dewy bed, and the fresh airs 

Play in his smiling beams, giving the seeds of life to grow, 

And the fresh earth beams forth ten thousand thousand springs of life. 

Urthona is arisen in his strength : no longer now 
Divided from Enitharmon no longer the Spectre of Los. 

846 Where is the Spectre of prophecy ? where is the deluded phantom ? 
Departed : and Urthona issues from the ruinous walls, 
In all his ancient strength, to form the golden armour of science 
For intellectual war the war of swords departed now, 

848 In dark religions are departed and sweet science reigns. 



END OP THE DREAM. 



ERRATA AND ADDENDA. 



AT theliead of the addenda to " Vala " we must place the following 
lines, which were omitted from the text by error. They occur 
between lines 7 and 8, and lines 8 and 9, of Night II. The sentence 
should read thus : 

The horrors of death 
Beneath his feet shot through him as he stood in the human 

brain, 

No more exulting, for he saw eternal death beneath. 
Pale, he beheld futurity ; pale, he beheld the abyss 
Where Enion blind, and age-bent, wept in direful hunger craving, 
All ravening like the hungry worm, and like the silent grave. 

The next omission occurs between lines 88 and 89. The sentence 
should read : 

I opened all the floodgates of the heavens to quench her thirst, 
And I commanded the great deep to hide her in his hand, 
Till she became a little weeping infant, a span long. 

In Night III. the following line is missing after line 103 : 

She ended ; from his wrathful throne burst forth the black-haired 
storms. 

The next omission is between lines 126 and 127 of Night VI. The 
line is a sentence in itself : 

He knew they were his children, ruined in his ruined world. 
After line 136, the following should be added : 



140 ERRATA AND ADDENDA. 

Then he had time enough to repent of his rashly-threatened curse. 
He saw them accursed beyond his curse ; his soul melted with fear. 
He could not take their fetters off, for they grew to the soul, 
Nor could he quench the fires, for they flamed out from the heart. 
Nor could ho calm the elements, because himself was subject. 
So he threw his flight in terror, in pain, and in repentant tears. 

Other omissions occur in Night IX. Lines 454 and 455 conceal 
the loss of a line. They should read thus : 

The furious wind still rends around. They flee in sluggish effort. 
They beg, they entreat in vain now ; they listened not to entreaty. 

Between lines 283 and 284 a line is lost. The sentence should 
read : 

And the fallen Man, who was arisen upon the Rock of Ages, 
Beheld the visions of God, and he arose up from the Rock, 
And Urizen rose with him, &c. 

The restoration of these lines would alter the numbers of all the 
references to such parts of each Night as follow them. This would 
involve reprinting most of the first volume as well as of the poem, 
and would delay the issue of the book to another season. The 
omissions were discovered too late to be corrected in the press. The 
original MS. was copied out twice ; once before it was thoroughly 
read and its order understood, and once after. These lines were lost 
partly through the complexity of the MS., and partly through the 
re-copying and the interpretation having been carried on at the same 
time. The reader is begged to accept apologies. 

The oversight of sending an un-read revise of the printed pages to 
press has caused the following minor errors to be left in it : 

Night I. The new paragraph should begin at line 224, not 225. 
Night II. Line 8, for tJiough read tliou. 
108, for right read night. 
395, not numbered. 

New paragraphs should begin at lines 257 and 278, not at 255 and 276. 
Night VI. Line 274, for ruin read river. 
Night Vn. Line 302, omit the last word brutish. 
307, omit the last word conferred. 
,, 406, begin a new paragraph. 



ERRATA AND ADDENDA. 141 

Night VII. Line 420, misnumbered 20. 

,, 426, end with a full stop. 
,, 428, for Luban read Laban. 
564, for waned read warred. 
,, 672, should begin, Now, now, the battle, &o. 
Night VIII. Line 1, for counsel read council. 
23, for Wand read Hand. 
170, last word, for roost read roots. 
,, 240, numbered 40 erroneously. 
,, 402, for the first word To, read Lo. 
430, for Urithona read Urthona. 
Night IX. Line 130, before great, read oh. 

224, begin a new paragraph. 
,, 229, omit the word bursting. 
230, and 231, should read thus : 

All things revived, flew from their centres. Battling bones to bones, 
Trembling and shaking, join : the shivering clay breathes. 
,, 432, for yon, read you. 
546, for though read thou. 



FRAGMENTS. 



THE following fragments discovered among the pages of the MS. of 
" Vala " are interesting. Some were used in the poem with varia- 
tions. They give a useful glimpse into the growth of the ideas. 

The following bears two illustrations the first representing 
Urizen ; the second, Ahania, not seeing Luvah as of old, but only his 
feet. The whole passage was as carefully copied out by Blake as the 
Nights I. and II., and seems to have been intended for Night II. 
But there is no place where it could come in. We must suppose it 
to have been rejected. Some lines will be recognized as afterwards 
used later in the poem. 

The horse is of more value than the Man, the Tiger fierce 
Laughs at the Human form. The Lion mocks and thirsts for blood. 
They cry, Spider, spread thy web ! Enlarge thy bones, and fill'd 
With marrow, sinews, and flesh, exalt thyself, attain a voice. 
6 Call to thy dark armed hosts, for all the sons of Men muster 

together, 

To desolate their cities ! Man shall be no more ! Awake, Hosts, 
The Bowstring sang upon the hills. Luvah and Vala rode 
Triumphant in the bloody sky. The Human form is no more. 

The listening stars heard. The first beam of the morning started 

back. 

10 He cried out to his father Depart ! Depart ! But sudden seized, 
And clad in steel, and his horse proudly neighed. He smelt the 

battle 

Afar off. Rushing back, reddening with rage, the Mighty Father 
Seized his bright sheep-hook, studded with gems and gold. He 

swung it round 



FRAGMENTS. 143 

His head, shrill sounding in the sky. Down rushed the sun with 
noise 

is Of war. The mountains fled away ; they sought a place beneath. 
Vala remained in deserts of dark solitude, nor sun nor moon 
By night nor day to comfort her. She laboured in thick smoke. 
Tharmas endured not; he fled howling. Then a barren waste sunk 

down, 
Conglobing in the dark confusion. Meantime, Los was born ; 

20 Thou, Enitharmon. Hark ! I hear the hammer of Los. 

They melt the bones of Vala and the bones of Luvah in wedges ; 
The innumerable sons and daughters of Luvah, closed in furnaces, 
Melt into furrows. "Winter blows his bellows. Ice and snow 
Tend his dire anvils. Mountains moan, and rivers faint and fail. 

25 There is no city, nor cornfield, nor orchard ; all is rock and sand. 
There is no sun, nor moon, nor stars, but ragged wintry rocks 
Jostling together in the void : suspended by inward fires. 

Impatience now no longer can endure. Distracted Luvah, 
Bursting forth from the loins of Enitharmon, thou fierce terror, 
so Go, howl in vain. Smite, smite his fetters ; smite, O wintry 

hammers ; 

Smite, Spectre of Urthona ; mock the fiend who drew us down 
From heavens of joy into their deep. Now rage, but rage in vain 

Thus sang the demons of the deep. The clarion of war blew loud. 
The feast redounds, and crowned with roses and the circling vine 
35 The enormous Bride and Bridegroom sat. Beside them Urizen, 
With faded radiance, sigh'd : forgetful of the flowing wine, 
And of Ahania, his pure Bride ; but she was distant far. 

But Los and Enitharmon sat in discontent and scorn, 
Craving the more the more enjoying, drawing out sweet bliss 
40 From all the turning wheels of heaven and the chariots of the slain, 
At distance far in night repelled, in direful hunger craving, 



144 FRAGMENTS. 

42 Summer and winter round revolving in the mighty deeps 
Euion 

And so the fragment ends. Though it was carefully re-copied 
by Blake, the metre and music were never sufficiently considered. 
Line 33 will bo recognized as line 695 of " Vala," Night VII. The 
Demons of the deep there sing the song attributed to the Spectre Sons 
of Albion in " Jerusalem," p. 65. The feast of which we have heard 
is part of the Sun-myth of TJrizen. Line 38, as will be noticed, is 
line 64(J of " Vala," Night II. It was for this portion of the book that 
the page was destined, as is shown by its similarity in paper, style of 
sketch, and handwriting to the whole of Night II. as much as by the 
subject. 

Here is another fragment 

.... Rahab triumphs over all. She took Jerusalem 

Captive, a willing captive by delusive arts impelled 

To worship Urizen's dragon form, to offer his own children 

Upon the bloody altars. John saw these things revealed in heaven 

> On Patmos Isle, and heard the soul cry out to be delivered. 
He saw the harlot of the Kings of Earth, and saw her cup 
Of fornication, food of Ore and Satan, pressed from the fruit of 

Mystery. 

But when she saw the form of Ahania weeping on the void, 
And heard Enion's voice sound from the caverns of the grave, 

10 No more spirit remained in her. She secretly left the synagogue ; 
She communed with Ore in secret ; she hid him with the flax 
That Enitharmon had numbered away from the heavens. 
She gathered it together to consume her Harlot Robes 
In bitterest contrition ; sometimes self-condemning, repentant, 

is And sometimes kissing her robe of jewels and weeping over them ; 
Sometimes returning to the synagogue of Satan in pride, 
And sometimes weeping before it in humility and trembling. 
The synagogue of Satan uniting against mystery, 
Satan divided against Satan, resolved in open Sanhedrin 

20 To burn Mystery with fire, and form another from her ashes. 
For God put it into their heart to fulfil all His will. 



FRAGMENTS. 145 

The ashes of Mystery began to animate ; they called it Deism 
And Natural Religion. As of old, so now anew began 
24 Babylon again in infancy, called Natural Religion. 

In this fragment lines 4 and 5 repeat what is told in " Milton," 
p. 42, 1. 22, and show, along with many other examples, that the 
symbolic sense in which Blake read the Bible was the sense in which 
he wrote his own poems. 

The last lines show the same idea as that contained in the accounts 
of the Twenty-seven Heavens " Where Luther ends Adam begins 
again in eternal circle." " Jerusalem," p. 75, line 24. 

Another fragment. This time we have evidently a sketch of a 
portion of Night I. The symbol is Virgo-Scorpio in an early mental 
form. The next fragment will show it more matured. 

Beneath the veil of Vala rose Tharmas from dewy tears. 

The Eternal Man bow'd his bright head, and Urizen, Prince of Light, 

Awakened Vala. Ariston ran forth with bright Ahana, (sic) 

And dark Urthona roused his shady bride from her deep den. 

Pitying, they viewed the new-born demon, for they could not love. 

Male-formed the demon mild, athletic force his shoulders spread, 

And his bright feet firm as a brazen altar ; but the parts 

To love devoted female. All astonished stood the hosts 

Of heaven, whilst Tharmas with winged speed flew to the sandy shore, 

He rested on the desert wild, and on the raging sea 

He stood and stretched his wings and 

With printless feet, scouring the corners of the joyful sky, 
Female her form, bright on the summer, but the parts of love 
Male, and her bow (? brow), radiant as' day, darted a lovely scorn. 
Tharmas beheld from his rock 

On the back of the paper bearing these fragments the following is 
written in pencil : 

The ocean calm, the clouds fold round. The fiery flame of love 
Inwraps the immortal limbs, struggling in terrific joy 

10 



146 FRAGMENTS. 

Not long. Thunders and lightnings swift, rendings and blushing 

winds 

Sweep o'er the struggling copulation in fell writhing pangs.. 
They lie in twisting agonies beneath the covering heavens. 

The womb impressed, Enion fled and hid in verdant mountains, 
Yet her heavenly orbs 

From Enion pours the seed of life, and death in all her limbs 
Froze. In the womb of Tharmas rush the rivers of Enion's pain. 
Trembling he lay, swelled with the deluge in the anguish 

Here a fragment from Night L, hardly altered when incorporated 
with the poem. Yet here, as elsewhere, some hint of the essential 
idea escapes, and reveals itself in the first improvisation, though the 
thought is less obvious when the sustained myth is produed. 

Mingling his horrible brightness with her tender limbs, then high 

she soared, 
Shrieking above the ocean, a bright wonder that Nature shuddered 

at 
Half woman and half serpent. All his lovely changing colours 

mix 
With her fair crystal clearness. In her lips and cheeks his poisons 

rose 

In blushes like the morning, and his scaly armour softening, 
A monster, lonely in the heavens or wandering on the earth, 
With female voice warbling upon the hills and hollow vales, 
Beauty all blushing with desire, a self-enjoying wonder. 
For Enion brooded, groaning loud ; the rough sea vegetates 

golden rocks, 

And thus her voice j Glory ! Delight ! sweet enjoyment born 
To mild eternity, shut in a three-fold shape delightful, 
To wander in sweet solitude, enraptured at every wind. 

Then across the ocean Enion brooded groaning. The golden rocks 

vegetated, 
Infolding the bright woman from the desolating winds. 



FRAGMENTS. 147 

The last two lines are erased. The idea grew with contemplation. 
In the poem we no longer have merely the virgo-scorpio, the woman- 
serpent, the mixture of beauty and desire. The two attributes como 
forth and reveal themselves as twin children, who draw her life into 
themselves or absorb her attributes till she vanishes, and they 
appear as Time and Space in their first innocence. 

In the above lines a few verbal alterations were made, not without 
significance. In the first line brightness was crossed out and darkness 
substituted. In the third serpent was struck out and replaced by 
cherub. In the fifth, scaly armour is made to give place to rocky 
features. The meaning is obvious. The brightness of the serpent's 
gems (or the rainbow's colours), being food of the five senses, is dark- 
ness to the spirit. The cherub of mortal love is the serpent 
(compare second illustration to " Vala "), and the rocky features of 
the flesh or of literal scripture, or of morality are the same as the 
scales of Satan's natural armour. 

On the other side in pencil is a mere scrap, also from Night I. 

That I should hide thee with my power and d 

And now thou darkenest in thy presence ; never from my 
sight 

There is no more here. A sketch beside it shows the back of a 
woman who is seated in the coils of a serpent, whose body seems to 
have grown from her thighs like the fishy half of a mermaid. 

Another fragment begins with the passage in Night VIII., 
line 263. 

The Lamb of God stood before Satan opposite. 

The first ten lines are the same, but at the tenth and after we have 
the following : 

Such seemed the synagogue to distant view ; around them stood 

The daughters of Canaan and Moab, binding on the stones 

Their victims, and with knives tormenting them, singing with 
tears 

Over their victims. Thus was the Lamb of God condemned to 
death. 

They nailed him upon the tree of Mystery, and weeping over 

him, 

10* 



148 FRAGMENTS. 

And mocking, then worshipping, calling him lord and king, 
Sometimes as twelve daughters lovely, and sometimes as five 
They stood in beaming beanty, and sometimes as one, even Rahab 
Who is Mystery, Babylon the Great, Mother of Harlots. 

The following continues the passage, but has all been struck out : 

And Rahab stripped off Luvah's robe from off the limbs of God, 
Then first she saw his glory, and her harlot form appeared 

In all its turpitude beneath the divine light 

She made herself a mantle of Lnvah's robes, 

Also the vegetative bodies which Enitharmon wove in her loins 

Opened within the heart, and in the loins, and in the brain 

To Beulah, and the dead in Beulah descended through their 

gates. 

And some were woven one-fold, some two-fold, and some three- 
fold. 
In head and heart and reins, according to their fittest order, 

Of most mournful pity and compassion to the spectrous dead. 
Darkness and sorrow covered all flesh ; eternity was darkened. 
Urizen sitting in his web of deceitful religion was tormented. 
He felt the female death, a dull and numbing stupor 

This brings us to line 262 of the same Night. 

Such are the fragments found among the pages of the MS. of 
" Vala." 



TEXT OF "VALA." 

AUTHOR'S AND EDITORS' VERBAL EMENDATIONS. 

All alterations not marked as Blake's are by the Editors. 



NIGHT THE FIRST. 

Line 23, after Enion Blake has inserted later reading, for the line 

is, I have hidden thee Jerusalem in silent contention. 
93, Blake's other reading to whence I emerged is of death and 

hell ; it is struck out. 
104, later the words For Jerusalem were inserted after a 

tabernacle. 

117, the word on after But omitted for metre. 
,, 126, after J, alone before remain omitted. 
129, are transposed from after eyes to before my. 
132, and after sinner omitted. 

133, originally Ah me ! Wretched ! What have I done ? 
,, 183, the words that all after find omitted. 
142, thee with after delight omitted. 
,, 145, will after evermore omitted. 
148, and inserted before shrieking. 
,, 151, all his lovely changing colours mix altered later to his scaly 

armour softening by Blake. 
,, 161, The word enormous after growing omitted. The word and 

before growing omitted by mistake. 
162, richest altered to rich. 



150 TEXT OF "VALA." 

Lino 183, in after drawing inserted, an alteration required for metre, 

and suggested by line 185. 
After line 186, a line not printed here, which read : 

Thus Enion gave them all her spectrous life in dark despair, 
but spectrous life is erased, and there is no 
substituted expression. 
Line 189, altered from gave visions and sent heaven, into made windows 

into Eden, by Blake. 
190, the last word, out, inserted. 
194, their after kept inserted. 
199, all after Mercy, to inserted. 

202, after before sleepers inserted ; all before their omitted. 
205, and before named, also and before brooded omitted. 
218, fill after passions inserted, and fear after shame omitted. 
222, stood thus : She drove the females away from Los ; Los drove 

the males from her away. 
254, stood : First born for the sport and amusement of man now 

born to drink up all his powers. 
274, upon for on. 
259 and 296, stood thus : 

Of Light. Silent the Prince of Light viewed Los, At length a 

brooded 
Smile broke from Urizen, for Enitharmon brightened more and 

more. 
305, stood thus : Los answered furious, art thou one of those who 

when most complaisant 
353, ended thus : wound round, sounding. 
356, later alternative reading of Blake, Epltraim called out io 

Tiriel ; Awake, oh brother Mountain! 
358, 359, 360 and 361, stood thus : 

Let us refuse the Plough and Spade, the heavy Holler, and 

spiked 

Harrow. Burn all these cornfields. Throw down all these 
fences. 



VERBAt EMENDATIONS* 151 

Fattened on Human blood and drunk with wine of life is letter 

far 
Than all these labours of the harvest and the vintage. See 

this river. 
Line 372, wine, and before blood inserted as belonging both to metre 

and to the correspondence with line 359. 
,, 382, last words, sandy deserts, altered to desert sands. 
392, an exudation altered to exuded. 
,, 394, there before he sank inserted. 
399, on altered to upon. 

,, 424, at the end of the line, terrific raged altered to and raged. 
434, Snowdon offered as a later and alternative reading for Gilead 

by Blake. 

,, 434, last word, sound, inserted. 

,, 442, Beth Peor altered later to Conway Vale by Blake. 
446, last word, thus, inserted. 
456, after J, remaining omitted. 
,, 463, after dictate, thou inserted. 
468, for the deep, Blake gives later, the Atlantic. 
487, last word, before, inserted. 
,, 497, conflict altered to fight, the after all omitted. 
,, 501, stood : Deep, trouble, without end, separated from Beulah, far 
beneath. 

NIGHT THE SECOND. 

Line 3, Man altered later to Albion by Blake. 

4, Porches later for Ears by Blake. 

,, 28, after gold, beaten omitted. 

,, 32, last word, stood, inserted. 

,, 103, Human Terror altered to Human Delusion by Blake. 

132, globe altered to Pyramid by Blake. 

135, centre altered to basement, and both erased by Blake. 

,, 140, Globe altered to Cube by Blake. 

245, orbs altered later to cubes by Blake. 

,, 270, spring altered later to season by Blake. 



J52 IKXT OK "VALA.'* 

Lino 338, again inserted. 
341, even inserted. 
348, sounding inserted. 
361, abroad, even inserted. 

394, vintage altered into Jiarvest. The words are usually coupled 
together. In the present line the waggon of corn points 
out that harvest was the figure intended. 
415, terrible afterwards altered to spectrous by Blake. 



NIGHT THE THIRD. 

Line 1, again inserted. 
5, after stars, thy omitted. 
14, Ahania altered later to shadow by Blake. 
39, after but, oh, how omitted. 
41, after Ahania, Listen to altered to hear 
66, He ceased before The shadowy omitted ; hovered altered to 

hung. 

,, 68, Fallen one altered later to Albion by Blake. 
69, Man arose altered later to Albion rose by Blake. 
71, Fallen one altered later to Albionby Blake. 
79, Ancient Man altered later to Albion by Blake. 
81, Man altered later to Albion by Blake. 
83, Fallen Man altered later to Albion by Blake. 
91 to line 103 is written later, and belongs to the time when 

Albion became substituted for Man. 
104, 105, 106, were written also at this time. On the margin of 

the MS. they stood thus : 

Albion closed the western gate and shut America out 
By the Atlantic, for a curse and hidden horror. 
And an altar of victims to sin and repentance. 

Line 107. The rest of the poem is all first draught in Blake's 
handwriting. The previous part had been copied in a school-child 
text hand, prolably by Blake and corrected here and there for 






VERBAL EMENDATIONS. 153 

mystical, but never for metrical reasons. A considerable time seems 
to have passed between the writing of the copied part, and the 
making of the corrections and the writing of all the rest. Judged by 
the ink and look of the hand, all from here onwards belongs to one 
period, and was written very rapidly, in sections of over fifty, or over 
a hundred lines at a time. 
Line 147, before blue, flame of omitted. 

,, 151, after louder, was heard inserted. 

157, the last word of the line, struggling, omitted, as repeated next. 

168, after on, my ; and after that, now inserted. 

182, after hoped, that inserted. 

185, after remain, and then omitted. 



NIGHT THE FOURTH. 

Line 21, last word, then, inserted. 

31, last word, yet, inserted. 

38, he altered to him. 

45, again inserted. 

,, 73, after separate in, stench and omitted. 

81, after not, that omitted. 
83, before remember, well omitted. 

,, 85, after fleeting, and inserted. 

89, before wedge, red inserted. 

90, last word, hard, inserted. 
94, before vibrations, strong omitted. 
96, before last word,/orw, piteous omitted. 
,, 98, before soft embraced, saio and inserted. 

,, 105, into the, before air, altered to to. 

,, 108, last words after rage, as now, inserted. 

116, after Enitharmon, for omitted. 

122, after hope, the inserted. 

,, 167, before iron, hard inserted. 

,, 168, after rock, many omitted. 

,, 172, after silent, his voice omitted. 



164 TEXT OF "YALA." 

Line 174, before Los, always inserted. 

180, after to-night, and, and after day, and omitted. 

191, before wrath, his omitted. 

199 to 204, stood thus: 

Circling round the dark demon with howlings, dismay, and 

sharp blightings, 

The Prophet of Eternity beat on his iron links and links of brass 
And as he beat round the hurtling demon, terrified at the shape 
Enslaved humanity put on, he became what he beheld, 
Raging against Tharmas, his god, and uttering 

207, before wrath, ceaseless omitted. 

208, before surging, now inserted. 

209, stood thus : 

Settled, a lake, bright and shining, and clear, white as the snow. 

219, after shooting, out inserted. 

221, first word, and, also after passed over, and inserted. 

223, after deep, deep omitted. 

225, last word, him, inserted. 

230, after passed, over and inserted. 

234, after over, and inserted. 

237, after passed, over inserted. 

240, first word, then, omitted ; of before thirst inserted. 

241, after passed, over and a state inserted. 

244, before dismay, howling omitted. 

247, saw, altered to beheld. 

249, before comforted, they were omitted. 

253, whatever, altered to whatsoever. 

256, last word, Thee, omitted. 

264, for Man, Albion, by Blake. 

269, after will, but inserted. 

274, for deeps beneath, starry wheels by Blake. 

276, after God, go forth and inserted. 

280, strong altered to mighty. 

283, after as, labouring inserted. 



\ 



VERBAL EMENDATIONS. 155 

Line 284, after terrified, at altered to as he beheld. 
,, 286, after doing, and inserted. 
After this line is a pencil note by Blake : 

" Bring in here the globe of blood, as in book of ' Urizen.' " 



NIGHT THE FIFTH. 

Line 3, after curses, and omitted. 
,, 9, after leaves, and omitted. 
13 and 14, stood : 

Yet mighty bulk, and majesty, and beauty remained, but 
unexpansive, 

As far as highest Zenith from lowest Nadir, so far they shrunk. 
27, after waxes, the omitted. 
28, after with, rending omitted. 
,, 29, after cried, out inserted. 
,, 38, after howlings, of omitted. 
39, after opened, looking inserted. 
,, 70, first word, And, inserted. 
,, 71, after darkness, and omitted. 
72, fed by altered to feeding on. 
78, before Los, and omitted. 
,, 85, before succeeds, soon inserted. 
,, 90, before formed, always inserted. 
,, 92, after chain, of altered to made of the. 
,, 100, after mountain, and inserted. 

,, 105, stood : Tenfold. The demon's rage flamed tenfold forth, rending, 
106, after louder, and altered to ever. 
,, 107, before waves, the omitted. 
131, 132 stood : 

There waves the harvest and the vintage rejoices. The springs 

Flow into rivers of delight. There the spontaneous flowers. 
,, 163, after Nor, could inserted. 
,, 169, after Ore, entering omitted. 



156 TEXT OF "VALA." 

Line 170, after Despair, and omitted. 

182, after felt, the omitted ; before howling, fierce omitted. 

192, after mountains, of Urizen omitted. 

198, from my palace transposed to precede walked. 

199, after Harpers, followed altered to came. 

200, after light, composed altered to made. 

204, round me hovered, altered to hovered round. 

219, before /, lo inserted. 

220, after sceptre, and ; and after crown, me omitted. 

224, after spears, of light inserted. 

227, after lily, is omitted. 

,, 236, after steeds, of light transposed from after steeds in line 235. 

239, perhaps this is altered to this may be. 

241, stood : When thought is closed in caverns, love shall show its 
roots in deepest hell. 



NIGHT THE SIXTH. 

Line 1, after arose, and inserted. 

4, unsated his thirst altered to his thirst being sated. 

8, after sitting, wrapped, and after in, these inserted. 

,, 9, on altered to upon. 

12, first word, answer, altered to answerest. 

31, invited altered to made. 

34, after and, the sons of, and after sent, them omitted. 

36, colours altered to hues. 

37, stood thus : " I will blackness; for jewelry, hoary frost ; for 

ornament, deformity. 

38, after sweet odoura, stinking altered to smell. 

39, after inarticulate, through frost omitted. 

42, after and, the inserted ; before obstinacy, stillborn omitted. 

,, 44, obscure, altered to dark. 

47, first word, then, inserted. 

49, froze to solid altered to frozen. 



VERBAL EMENDATIONS. 157 

Line 73, before chasms, horrible omitted. 
76, after brass, they omitted. 
79, last word descended, altered to went down. 
82, cruel before delight omitted. 
83, Urizen with altered to Urizen's. 
87, beheld altered to saw. 
89, The immense altered to immensity. 
93, before lightenings, or brooding omitted. 
,, 94, last word penetrate altered to reach. 
98, after woes, and mutual altered to though he. 

100, last word, in, omitted. 

101, crowns of serpents altered to serpent crowns. 

102, lying in beds of sulphur altered to in sulphur beds. 

103, marching altered to march. 

104, after hundreds, and of; and after fifties, and of omitted. 

105, before their shoulders, them upon altered to on. 

106, first word in omitted. 

109, first word still inserted. 

110, before weary, faint omitted, he transposed after wandered. 

111, heaved with their torment, altered to their torment heaved. 

1 12, before castles, and omitted ; after castles, built omitted. 

,, 113, after There, he ; after beheld, the ; after tigers, and of omitted. 

117, after monsters, or omitted. 

118, after torment, shining and omitted. 

119, before columns, some; after stretched, out omitted. 

,, 120, seeking ease altered to for ease. 

121, before inarticulate, but an omitted. 

,, 123, heavy and dull, altered to dull and heavy. 

130, A rock, a cloud, a mountain altered to rock, mountain, cloud. 

133, The furrows and the field altered to or furrow 'd field. 

135, after feet, and omitted. 

140, last word, former, omitted. 

,, 145, a third repetition of falling omitted by mistake, 

155, before ending, and omitted. 

,, 164, before who goes, the man omitted, 



158 TEXT OP " VALA." 

Line 166, Divine Hand altered to Hand Divine, as elsewhere written 
172, rise altered to arise. 
,, 175, after earthquakes, and omitted. 
177, after vortex, fixing omitted. 
192, after head, downward altered to down. 
194, after labour, and omitted. 
212, stood: Shut up my powers. Then a seed in the vast womb of 

darkness. 

213, after oblivion, brooding omitted. 
215, before remain, to omitted. 
216, after labourer, of ages omitted. 
218, after promise, much omitted. 
224, last word, operate altered to work. 
226 before inward, away omitted. 
329, 230 stood : 

For Urizen lamented over them in a selfish lamentation. 
Till a white woof covered his limbs from head to foot. 
231, after snow, now inserted. 
232, last word, on, inserted. 
236, from vortex to vortex altered to the vortexes ; after drawn, 

out omitted. 

237, adjoined altered to joined. 
239, after bursting, with inserted. 
246, after down, again inserted. 
247, after anguish, as inserted. 
248, first words weaker and altered to that; last word, shrinking, 

altered to again to shrink. 

249, after Through, all ; after and, then inserted. 
250 stood : Ran through the abysses, rending the web, torment on 

torment. 

252, before hideous, his most omitted. 
255, before painful, ever omitted. 
258, before midday, the omitted. 
259, last word, darkness, altered to dark. 
260, first words transposed from shut up in stifling obstruction, 



VERBAL EMENDATIONS. 159 

Line 262, last words, in vain, inserted. 

263, before black, the ; and after sea, around omitted. 

,, 265, before deep, vast omitted. 

276, after Till, he omitted. 

277, first word, he, inserted. 

278, O'er wearied and in, altered to and wearied in his. 

279, climbed transposed from before with to after labour ; the last 

word, high, being omitted. 
280 stood : Till he beheld the world of Los from the peaJced rock of 

Urthona. 
,, 283, down the Vale of Urthona altered to down through Urthona' s 

Vale. 

298, after skull, the while inserted. 
299, last word, loud, inserted. 
302, armies transposed from after fifty-two. 
303 stood: From the four cliffs of Urthona rise glowing around the 

Spectre. 

310, the dreary altered to their. 
312, returning back to Urizen altered to to Urizen returning. 



NIGHT THE SEVENTH. 

Line 1, rose altered to arose. 

5, Urizen silent descended to. the caves altered to Urizen went silent 

down to caves. 

6, before fire, flaming omitted. 
,, 9, before redounding, the omitted. 
17, Around altered to round. 
,, 23, before thickest, robe of inserted. 
,, 25, stood : Then bursting from his troubled head with terrible 

visages and flaming hair. 

34, Wherever altered to ^vhere'er; after touch, and inserted. 
,, 36, when he found himself altered to finding him. 



160 TEXT OF " VALA." 

Lino 40, after seat, again inserted. 

60, throw altered to throwest ; last word, now, inserted. 

70, Go forth inserted. 

71, after deep, for lo omitted. 

77, before weight, own omitted. 

,, 78, before across, clear inserted ; horrible altered to horrid. 

82, still transposed from before obdurate to after resolved. 

87, before furious, here inserted ; after deep, for lo omitted. 

89, before diseases, the, before falling, of man, omitted ; upon 

altered to on. 

94, before ruin, dreadful omitted. 

102, before bread, the omitted. 

,, 108, upon altered to on. 

112, after evaporate, away inserted. 

113, down transposed from before to after Enitharmon ; to altered 

to unto. 

115, after crust, of bread omitted. 

117, after hearts, far ; after milstone, is, inserted. 

119, stood : With labour and with abstinence, say he looks healthy 

and happy. 

121, after will, soon inserted. 

122, with temper transposed from after live. 

,, 123, before gracious, by inserted. 

124, before gifts, small omitted ; after want, a gift omitted. 

125, he smiles transposed from before if you hear. 

127, after water, are altered to must be. 

128, last words we can omitted. 

129, first words, we can, inserted ; after spaniels, that are omitted. 

132, before labyrinth, its omitted. 

133, before devouring, by strong omitted. 

135, after hypocrisy, already omitted. 

142, stood : Avaunt cold hypocrite ; I am chained, or thou could'st 

not use me thus, 

145, last word storms omitted. 

148, now transposed from after me / before ZTraen, oh omitted. 




VERBAL EMENDATIONS. 161 

Line 152, Ore transposed from before creeping ; before began, he 
omitted. Blake partly corrected this line. He drew 
his pen through creeping, but offered no substitute, and 
left he as well as Ore. 

,, 155, Blake altered wisdom into affliction. 
159, ended thought himself sole author. 
171, over altered to o'er. 
179, the same change. 

203, before they, that ; after they, may, omitted. 
208, stood : For the shadow of Enitharmon descended, &c. 
209, shade altered to shadow, over to o'er. 
213, before poisonous, various omitted. 
,, 220, before Enitharmon, Oh inserted. 
223, before discordant, loud inserted. 
224, on that dread day inserted. 

225, lightnings play'd transposed from before around. 
228, stood : And its birth infaintings and sleep, and sweet delusions 

of Vala. 

231, before print, the omitted. 
232, before I, behold inserted. 
240, after heaven, for inserted. 
243, after then, behold omitted. 
245, after pale, at sight inserted. 
246, 247, stood: 

From the enormity, and called them Luvah and Vala, turning 

down 

The vales to find, &c. 

' 252, last word, pastures, altered to fields. 
256, stood : Then from its hinges, uttering its final groan, all 

Beulah fell. 

260, cavern dark altered to cave. 
266, tempests altered to storms. 
267, upon altered to on. 
270, after spirit, in the garden omitted. 

271, before dwelt, there omitted ; before joy, mutual inserted. 

11 






162 TEXT OF " VALA." 

Line 273, after waters, this omitted. 

274, after them, alternate altered to have. 

276, before morn, dread omitted. 

277, after divided, for the omitted. 

,, 285, and there divided altered to divided there. 

286, after I was, divided omitted. 

290, but still my spirit altered to my spirit still. 

299, after unite, again omitted. 

301, before annihilated, and omitted ; never can altered to cannot. 

,, 302, last word, brutish, should be omitted. 

303, first word, brutish, inserted ; after ravening, and devouring 

omitted. 

,, 304, after eyes are, always omitted. 

305, for anything but, altered into except for. 

306, after dead, for omitted. 

,, 311, after thus they, conferred omitted. 

314, ended : Los wept, and his fierce soul was terrified. 

315, ended : nor could his eyes perceive. 

317, last words, she ran, omitted. 

,, 318, after raving, about altered to ran through. 

320, last word, broken, omitted. 

,, 321, after gates, broke altered to broken. 

322, shadow shuddering altered to shade. 

326, before war, with inserted. 

327, last word, shadow, altered to shade. 

330, topmost altered to top ; shooting to sJioot. 

332, first words, But then, omitted. 

,, 335, first transposed from after spectre to after "brother. 

338, terrible Demon altered to Demon dread. 

339, consiimmating by pains and labours altered to to consume by 

pains. 

340, back returning altered to come. 

341, To life Eternal altered to back to Eternal life ; before self 

real omitted. 

343, last word but one upon altered to on, 



VERBAL EMENDATIONS. 163 

Line 345, before buried, though omitted. 

,, 346, last words, after speak, and be silent omitted. 

348, after heart and, in inserted. 

,, 349, before in Eternity, it was omitted. 

350, and consummated altered to consumed. 

352, stood, When I was a ravening, and hungry thirsting cruel 

lust and murder. 

354, evaporate altered to vanish. 

356, stood : Art nothing, being created continually by Mercy and 

love divine. 

357, after Los, furious omitted. 

359, after convinced, can still omitted. 

360, after power, even omitted. 

373, after Los, labouring omitted ; after builded, the inserted. 

375, after heaven, and after beneath, and omitted. 

377, after atmosphere, sublime omitted. 

379, after creeping, and omitted. 

381, before spake, thus omitted. 

383, before last word, knew, I inserted. 

384, before ransom, a omitted. 

387, last word thou inserted. 

391, before given, surely inserted. 

392, after spectre, in part omitted ; last word him omitted. 

393, first words, being a, altered to as. 

395, first word of omitted. 

396, beheld altered to saw. 

398, after spectre, of Urthona omitted; before I am, Behold 

inserted. 

400, before punishment, curse and omitted. 

403, last word, thus, inserted. 

405, first word, for, omitted ; without a created body transposed. 

409, before behold, look omitted. 

413, before trembling, from inserted. 

414, before injuries, ancient omitted. 

415, before have, surely omitted, 

11 * 



164 TEXT Of " VALA." 

Line 416, stood : Often enough to commence thy jealousy in fear and 

terror. 

417, be transposed from. before patient; because altered to /or. 

422, uttermost altered to last. 

423, last word, out, omitted. 

424, first word, out, inserted ; all who behold altered to who see. 

425, should transposed from before in futurity ; before in heavens^ 

have done omitted. 

429, after created, many omitted. 

,, 430, before sighing, and omitted. 

,, 431, before war, furious omitted. 

432, before weeping, the omitted. 

433, before piteous, those omitted ; before Jiappy, in omitted ; 

obscure for obscurity. 

435, fabricate altered to make. 

438, before sons, and omitted. 

440, Ancient altered to old. 

442, before Wonder, lovely terrible Los omitted ; after eternity, oh 

omitted. 

446, first words, and then, omitted. 

448, after fabricate, these inserted. 

449, themselves altered to them. 

450, before may live, through them inserted. 

451, before inspired, divine omitted. 

454, upon altered to on. 

469, last word, reposing, omitted. 

470, before ranks, out the omitted. 

,, 474, before forged, he omitted. 

475, before scales, in omitted. 

476, before Los, but, and before refused, he, omitted. 

486, after could not, so inserted. 

491, after hands, much inserted. 

492, ended : He beheld him as an infant. 

493, breathed transposed from before from ; within altered to in, 

494, before night, darkest omitted. 



VERBAL EMENDATIONS. 165 

Line 495, after rock, behold inserted. 

497, after revolved, at last inserted. 

499, last word, me, omitted. 

508, before sounding, hoarse omitted. 

518, secrecy, altered to secrets; they bore transposed from after 

lamps. 

521, before lion, furious omitted. 

541, arise altered to rise. 

547, was transposed from before divided. 

551, last words, in sighs, inserted. 

552, first words, in sighs, omitted ; the line continued, and 

sobbings, till all divided I was divided. 

553, lived transposed from before in my bosom. 

558, last word, them, omitted. 

563, before moon, distant omitted. 

,, 565, into the altered to in. 

567, before sun, bright ; before mist, a, omitted. 

571, after terror, to me omitted. 

579, before hate, his inserted. 

593, within the altered to in. 

594, before writing, therein inserted. 

59/, before bull, strong inserted. 

606, after places, that omitted. 

607, appointed transposed from after time. 

616, around altered to round. 

618, after arise, again inserted. 

622, before despairing, is inserted. 

640, last word, steeds, altered after to clouds by Blake. 

648, last words, the slain, transferred to first of 649. 

,, 668, last word, workmanship, altered to work. 

672, before the, all omitted. 

734, the words of Ore added later by Blake. 

748, before swimming, and again before falling, or omitted. 

770, before eagle, pinioned ; and after night, season, omitted. 



li.fi TKXT OK " VAI,A.'* 

NIGHT THE EIGHTH. 

Line 7, after shapes, were seen added. 
22, first word, and, omitted. 

155, the human form altered later to these terrors by Blake. 
164, after never, come inserted. 
430, Urthona altered later to the spectre by Blake. 
503, first word do inserted. 

NIGHT THE NINTH. 


Line 17, after hills, are all inserted. 

59, after called, to inserted. 

60, after heard, them omitted. 

69, last word, freds, transposed from first of next line. 

82, after intense, abroad inserted. 

87, first word, issuing, inserted. 

129, after arise, to altered to into. 

130, before souls, of inserted ; before great, oh ! is wanted. 

137, before strong, thou inserted. 

155, last words, to be burned, altered to to burn. 

218, after female, also inserted. 

229, before universe, bursting should have been omitted. 

230, 231, lines untouched, but should have been printed thus : 

All things revived flew from their centres : then the 
rattling bones 

To bones join, shaking and convulsed : the shivering clay 

breathes. 

262, before intense, on omitted. 
284, before flames, all inserted. 
285, omitted in error. 
344, after Urizen rose, up omitted. 
344, after hands, his feet omitted. 
348, before earth, the inserted. 



VERBAL EMENDATIONS. 16? 

Line 391, last words, but forthee, altered to were it not for thee. 
432, after freshly, you inserted, and misprinted yon. 
439, before birds, oh inserted. 
445, after come, near inserted. 
,, 451, after himself, laid down inserted. 
456, and saw altered to and looked and saw. 
461, first word, round, altered to around. 
470, after went, up omitted. 
473, before follow, often inserted. 
480, after mourned, faint omitted. 

,, 504, round altered to around; last words, over them, omitted. 
,, 560, before dreadful, the inserted. 
563, last words repeating he exulted omitted. 
,, 599, before solid, the omitted, before way, fibrous inserted. 
600, before joys, the ; after existence, and ; before stems, tree, 

inserted. 
601, and 602, stood : 

Rear on the mountains stem after stem. The scaly newt creeps 
From the stone, and the armed fly springs from the rocky crevice. 
603, after spider, and inserted. 
,, 604, before delight, joy and omitted, 
,. 605, before the tender, lo inserted. 
606, after round, about; after brighten, on, inserted; last word 

mountains altered to hills. 
607, after throng- up, through; after valley, and the inserted; last 

word, forests, altered to woods. 
611, stood: over the ruined worlds, &c. 
,, 612, first word, then, inserted. 
,, 615, before night, all the, omitted. 
,, 618, stood : not born for the sport and amusement of Man but 

soon to drink up all his powers. 
Compare Night I., line 254, also in this list. 
626, nature corrected later to science by Blake. 
,, 643, stood : Beneath they saw their sons and daughters wondrous 

inconceivable. 



168 



TEXT OK " VALA." 



Line 682, after here, so soon omitted. 
684, after house, in joy inserted. 
722, rose singing, altered to sang. 
729, before ravening, distracted omitted. 
,, 741, before leopard, spotted omitted. 

743, after bury them, omitted ; making after grots altered to 
with. 

759, first words, who lives, transferred to end of line above. 

760, show altered to showing. 

764, after love, and these omitted. 

768, after he said, he said, repetition, omitted. 

772, after gold, gold were omitted. 



DESCKIPTIVE NOTES TO "VALA." 



THE following notes assist the comprehension of the growth of the 
idea : 

The early pages of " Vala," up to Night III., line 106, were probably written in 
1797, all but the opening lines which occupy space when a complete erasure has 
been made. 

Lines 9 and 10 are even more recent, and are in pencil. So is line 18. In the 
margin occur two lines that seem to have no place in the text but rather to be an 
author's note of visionary experience. They are written side ways 

The men have received their death-wounds and their emanations are fled 
To me for refuge, and I cannot turn them out for pity's sake. 

Lines. 38, 39, and 40 are later than the rest. 

Lines 41 to 45 (inclusive) in pencil opposite the serpent's mouth in design, seem 
to be intended for the words that Tharmas wept into his cloud. 

Lines 46 to 57 inclusive, sideways on margin, later than text. 

Lines 66 to 98 inclusive, marked later by Blake for erasure. 

Lines 99 to 122 inclusive, left to stand as the story of the incident. 

Lines 123 to 131 inclusive, obliterated. The following added to them and 
separately obliterated. 

So wailed she, trembling before her own created phantasm, 
Which animating times on times by the force of her sweet song, 
Beared 

The last altered before erasure to 

But standing on the rocks her woven shadow glowing bright, 
Eeared 

Instead of these, namely 99 onwards, the lines 197 to 211 inclusive, were to have 
been inserted there. They are of later date. 
Lines 132 to 154 inclusive, left to stand as the story. 
Lines 155 to 157 inclusive, crossed out in pencil by Blake. 
Lines 158 to 164, to stand. 
Lines 165 to 168, later. See fragment No. I. 
Lines 169 to 177, not to stand. 
Lines 178 to 186, not to stand. 
Lines 187 to 196, later. 



170 DESCRIPTIVE NOTES TO " VALA." 

Lines 197 to 211 should perhaps have been placed as already indicated, before 
132. But they have no real position here at all, being a late paragraph written 
separately. 

Lines 212 to 224, to stand. Then an erased lines 

Nine years they view the glowing spheres reading the visions of Beulab. 

Then conies a note that the next line, that numbered 225, is to be the beginning 
of Might II. If this division had remained as final, Night I. would, after all 
erasures, have been disproportionately brief. 

Lines 225 to 262, to stand. 

Lines 263 to 270 afterwards erased by Blake. 

No long erasures restored after this, all to stand. 

Lines 305 to 315, later. 

Lines 331 to 337, later. 

Line 348 erased in pencil. 

After line 397 the words 

End of the First Night, 

are written. This is the second place marked for the end of the First Night. 

Lines 398 to 427 is a much later fragment, written on two sides of a piece of 
paper. At the end of line 413 we read for the third time 

End of the First Night. 

Lines 428 to end of Night I. are much later than the former pages, and are 
written on another kind of paper. Of these lines, 488 is an addition to the rest, 
made later in pencil. 

Attributing these lines to Night I. at all is conjectural. They have no other place. 
They were written later than the pages of Night II., which follow, but belong to 
the date of the lines 398, Ac., which are marked as belonging to this Night. 

By comparing the fragments of MS. given above on the Hermaphrodites, and the 
woman-serpent, with the passages marked for erasure by Blake, in the early pages 
of Night I., three stages of symbolic idea are seen like successive growths in the 
poet's mind. Beauty, the female, and Desire, the male called Enion and Tharmas 
are the hero and heroine of the story. They are Virgo and Scorpio; they 
mingle, and are seen as Hermaphrodite. They mingle more simply and are seen 
as marriage. Finally, they separate into Feeling and Change, and appear as 
Enitharmon and Los, the infants afterwards "known to mortals" (note the to 
mortals) as Time and Space. Blake is seen here still groping among his visions 
for the best expression of what his reflections told him must be their true meaning. 



NIGHT THE SECOND. 

Night II. was headed Night the First, and the word First erased. It is early in 
date except a few insertions. 

Line 4 is later. So is line 8. So are lines 23 and 32, added in pencil. Lines 33 
to 60 are also of later date. At 61 the MS., as originally copied out in fair hand, 



DESCRIPTIVE NOTES TO " VALA," 173 

Lines 325 to 327 are later. 

Line 494 begins a fresh portion of MS. It is called line 153 of Blake's first 
draught of this Night, and is another commencement. 

Line 609 ends a page. The MS. calls it 272, and directs that one of the 
beginnings shall be brought here, and used as the remainder of the Night. 

In what follows, lines 620, 621 and 623 are later, and also lines 676 and 677. 

Line 692 is later, also lines 698, 704 and 708. 

Beside the passage that ends with line 694 a pencil note, that has no place in the 
poem, occurs on the margin : 

Unorganised innocence an impossibility : 

Innocence dwells with Wisdom, but never with Ignorance. 

The' passage 729 to 743 is later, 

Line 786 is the only possible end of Night VII. 



NIGHT THE EIGHTH. 

In this Night the line 4 is later, and in defiance of the lack of a full stop, lines 
10 to 15 were to be erased, but are restored, as they were never re-written. 

Line 100 is later. Lines 104 to 106 are later. Lines 108 to 112 are an insertion, 
apparently later. 

Lines 197 to 235 is a later fragment on other papers, but its place for insertion 
marked here. See facsimile No. 15, where line 255 bears the early numbering, 
as 195. 

Line 252 is later. Line 261, containing the four Zoas by name, erased, as these 
are united, not cut off when the spiritual body is revealed. 

Lines 263 to 409 is an enlargement of a late fragment. See addenda. Of this 
enlargement the line 273 is still later, and lines 275 to 290 are later. Lines 325 to 
334 are later. 

The passage " But when Rahab," &c., line 335, was written three leaves earlier. 
The MS. directs us to take it from there and place it here, to line 408. This 
terminates the enlargement of the fragment. The original MS. had, when 
sketched, the line 609 as next after 263. It continues without a break to end of 
Night VIII. 



NIGHT THE NINTH. 

The heading of this Night suggests that it was conceived at the time when the 
title of the poem was to have been (writing be a guide) The Death and Judgment 
of the Ancient Man. The name " Albion " not being used in the MS. here. 

In this Night, line 32 is later, also line 50. Lines 113 and 127 are later. They 
seem utterances produced by the realization of the subject of the poem in the mind 



174 



DK8CR1PTIVK NOTES TO " VAI-A. 



of the poet as he sat reading his own manuscript. The same may be said of lines 
139 and 140, also insertions. 

The lines 200 to 202 are also insertions. In the next line it is noteworthy that 
The Eternal Man is the phrase employed. " Albion " is not used after Night IV. 

Line 256 is later, and also lines 354 to 256. 

Lines 328 and 329, later ; also lines 378, 379 and 383. 

Lines 487 to 490 are also later. Line 584 is later, also line 617, repeated from an 
earlier page. 

No other changes of the MS., other than the corrections of separate words 
given in the notes on the texts above, have been found in Blake's hand as 
contemporary with the writing itself. 




FATE IN ARCADIA : AND OTHER POEMS. BY EDWIN J. 

ELLIS. 

Illustrated by the Author. A Large Paper Edition, limited to 100 
copies, which contains nine additional Illustrations, printed by the 
Author at his own press ; 33 Illustrations in all. Impl. 8vo. Price 21s. 
An Edition in crown 8vo. Price 7s 6d. 



The Academy says : " His poetry is distinctly a criticism upon life, often tantalizing 
by the fantastic subtlety of its thought, but just as often fascinating by the beauty 
of its poetic form. There is indeed enough of the stuff of thought in this volume 
to furnish forth many of our contemporary poets." 

The Artist says : " The ' Eros ' is a virile conception, strongly handled, and- the 
groups facing the 63rd and 123rd pages show considerable sense of composition. 
. . . ' The Shepherd ' is a distinct success, and the Christ-subject, if not treated 
to our satisfaction, is at. least handled with dignity." 

St. James's Gazette : " Mr. Ellis is able to express himself much better with 
pencil than with pen." 

Daily Chronicle: "Though his designs have a certain quaint prettiness, his 
poems show, we think, the greater promise." 

The Bookseller : " It might seem a reflection upon Mr. Ellis's poetry to praise 
the designs with which he accompanies them, but such is not the case ; the 
illustrations are worthy of the verse, and that is saying much, for the verse is far 
above the average." 

The Speaker : " A work likely to attract much attention. It is embellished with 
twenty-four full-page illustrations by the author, which seem to be real embellish- 
ments, the product of a very unusual gift." 

The New Review : " Mr. Ellis has already learnt to feel for himself .... and he 
is able not only to feel, but to think for himself which is a rare accomplishment." 



OTHER WORKS BY W. B. YEATS. 

THE WANDERINGS OP OKSIN. Ballads, Lyrics, and Dramatic 

Sketches. (T. Fisher Unwin.) 

" At once the words begin to murmur and sing, and skim before the breath of 
poetic inspiration ; again the common is made uncommon, the old miracle is 
wrought anew ; you are carried away into rainbow-coloured lands of fantasy, there 
is a blowing of magic horns, a lovely enchantress is speaking in silken phrases, the 
swords of heroes are ringing in onsets, and the work-a-day world is for a time 
forgot." Scots Observer. 



176 

JOHN SHERMAN AND DHOYA. (Pseudonym Library. T. Fisher Unwin.) 

" Clever as John Sherman is, cleverness seems almost an odious quality to 
ascribe to pathos so unassertive, humour so delicate, and observation so penetra- 
tive Dhoya is not a story, and is far slighter. It is an Irish legend, or 

apalogue, of the days when there were giants in the land, and fairies, and magical 
influences. If there are any admirers of Ossian that yet remain among us we 
would ask them to read Dhoya, and purpend thereon." Saturday Review. 



Various Legends and Lyrics. 



THE COUNTESS KATHLEEN, and 
(T. Fisher Unwin.) 

" In these poems the immediate charm is their haunting music, which depends not 
upon any wealth of words, but upon a subtle strain of music in their whole quality 
of thoughts and images, some incommunicable beauty, felt in the simplest words 
and verses. Collins, Blake, Coleridge, had the secret of such music ; Mr. Yeats 
sings somewhat in their various ways, but with a certain instinct of his own, 
definitely Irish. The verse is stately and solemn, without any elaboration ; the 
thought falls into a lofty rythm. Or the verse is wistful and melancholy, an atJrial 

murmur of sad things without any affectation In all the poems, even the 

most mystical in thought, there is a deep tone of sympathy with the world's fortunes 
or with the natures of living things ; a curious tender gladness at the thought of it 
all. The poet finds : 

" In all poor foolish things that live a day, 
Eternal Beauty wandering on her way." 

" His ballads are full of this natural sentiment, shown rather in their simple 
mention of facts and things, as an old poet might mention them, than in any arti- 
ficial simplicity. There is humour in his verse : a sense of the human soul in all 
tilings, a fearless treatment of facts, a gentleness towards life, because it is all 
wonderful and nothing is despicable. And through the poems there pierces that 
spiritual cry, which is too rare and fine to reach ears satisfied with the gross 
richness of a material muse." Academy. 



O. NORMAN ANP SON, PRINTERS, HART STREET, COVENT OAKDEN, LONDON. 






PR 



E5 
v.3 



Robarts Library 

DUE DATE: 

Jan. 20, 1993 



Operation Book Pocket 

Some books no longer have 
pockets. Do you favour this 
cost-saving measure? 



D Yes 

a NO 



tr hallnt 



Blake, William 

The works of William Blake 



